Balance anger and sadness

Osho: “Anger and sadness are the same. Sadness is passive anger and anger is active sadness. It is difficult for a sad person to be angry. If you can make a sad person angry, his sadness will disappear immediately. It will be very difficult for an angry person to be sad. If you can make him sad, his anger will disappear immediately.

In all our emotions the basic polarity continuous – of man and woman, yin and yang, the male and the female. So if you are in tune with sadness, it is difficult to shift to anger, but I would like you to. Bring it out, act it out. Even if it looks like nonsense, then, too – be a buffoon in your own eyes but bring it out!

If you can float between anger and sadness, both become similarly easy. You will have a transcendence and then you will be able to watch. You can stand behind the screen and watch these games and then you can go beyond both. But first you have to be moving easily between these two; otherwise you tend to be sad – and when one is heavy, transcendence is difficult.

Remember, when two energies, opposite energies, are exactly alike, fifty-fifty, then it is very easy to get out of them because they are fighting and cancelling each other out and you are not in anybody’s grip. Your sadness and your anger are fifty-fifty, equal energies, so they cancel each other. Suddenly you have freedom and you can slip out. But if sadness is 70 percent and anger 30 percent, then it is very difficult. Thirty percent anger in contrast with 70 percent sadness means 40 percent sadness will still be there, and it will not be possible; you will not be capable of easily slipping out. That 40 percent will hang around.

So this is one of the basic laws of inner energies – to always let the opposite polarities come to an equal status and then you are able to slip out of them. It is as if two people are fighting and you can escape. They are so engaged with themselves that you need not worry and you can escape.

Don’t bring the mind in. Just make it an exercise. You can make it an everyday exercise; forget about waiting for it to come. Every day you have to be angry – that will be easier. So jump, jog, scream and bring it out. Once you can bring it for no reason at all, you will be very happy because now you have freedom. Otherwise even anger is dominated by situations; you are not a master of it. If you cannot bring it, how can you drop it?

In the beginning it looks a little awkward, strange or unbelievable, because you have always believed in the theory that it is somebody else whose insult has created the anger. That’s not true. Anger has always been there; somebody has just given an excuse for it to come up.

You can give yourself an excuse: Imagine a situation in which you would have been angry and become angry. Talk to the wall and say things, and soon the wall will be talking to you! Just go completely crazy. You have to bring anger and sadness to a similar status, where they are exactly proportionate to each other. They will cancel each other out and you can slip away.

George Gurdieff used to call this the way of the sly man – to bring inner energies to such a conflict that they are engaged together in cancelling each other out, and you have the opportunity to escape.”

Osho, Pharmacy for the Soul

***

Loneliness & aloneness

Osho: "Loneliness is a negative state of mind.

Aloneness is positive, notwithstanding what the dictionaries say. In dictionaries, loneliness and aloneness are synonymous,  they are synonyms; in life they are not.

Loneliness is a state of mind when you are constantly missing the other; aloneness is the state of mind when you are constantly delighted in yourself.

Loneliness is miserable, aloneness is blissful. Loneliness is always worried, missing something, hankering for something, desiring for something.

Aloneness is a deep fulfillment, not going out, tremendously content, happy, celebrating.

In loneliness you are off centre, in aloneness you are centred and rooted.

Aloneness is beautiful. It has an elegance around it, a grace, a climate of tremendous satisfaction.

Loneliness is beggarly. All around it there is begging and nothing else, it has no grace around it. In fact, it is ugly.

Loneliness is an dependence; aloneness is sheer independence - one feels as if one is one's whole world, one's whole existence."

Osho, Come Follow to You, Vol 4, #6

***

Times of disaster

Osho: "Times of disaster make you aware of the reality as it is. It is always fragile; everybody is always in danger.

Just in ordinary times you are fast asleep, so you don’t see it; you go on dreaming, imagining beautiful things for the coming days, for the future.

But in moments when danger is imminent, then suddenly you become aware that there may be no future, no tomorrow, that this is the only moment you have got.

So times of disaster are very revealing. They don’t bring anything new into the world; they simply make you aware of the world as it is – they wake you up.

If you don’t understand this, you can go mad; if you understand this, you can become awakened."

***

Guilt

Osho: "Guilt is part of the egoistic mind; it is not spiritual. Religions have been exploiting it, but it has nothing to do with spirituality. Guilt simply tells you that you could have done otherwise. It is an ego feeling: as if you were not helpless, as if everything were in your hands.

Nothing is in your hands. You yourself are not in your hands. Things are happening; nothing is being done. Once you understand this, guilt disappears. Sometimes you can cry and weep for something, but deep down you know it had to happen, because you are helpless, a part of such a great totality - and you are such a tiny part. It is like when there is a leaf on a tree and a strong wind comes and the leaf is separated from the tree. Now the leaf thinks a thousand and one things - that it could have been that way and not this way; that this separation could have been avoided. What could the leaf do? The wind was too strong.

Guilt goes on giving you the wrong notion that you are powerful, that you are capable of doing everything. Guilt is the shadow of the ego: you could not change the situation, and now you are feeling guilty about it. If you look deep into it, you will see that you were helpless, and the whole experience will help you to become less egoistic.

If you go on watching the shape things take, the forms that arise and the happenings that happen, by and by you drop the ego. Love happens - separation too. We cannot do anything about it. This is what I call a spiritual attitude: when you understand that nothing can be done; when you understand that you are just a tiny part of such a tremendous vastness."

***

Dealing with insults

Osho: "Buddha was passing a village. A few people, who were against him, gathered and they insulted him very deeply. He listened silently, very patiently. In fact, because of his patience, the people started becoming restless. They started feeling uncomfortable, because if you insult a man and he listens as if it is music, something is wrong. What is happening? They started looking at each other. Then one person asked Buddha: ‘What is the matter? Don’t you understand what we are saying?’

Buddha said: ‘Because I can understand, that’s why I am so silent. Had you come ten years before, then I would have jumped on you. Then there was no understanding. Now I understand. And for your foolishness I cannot punish myself. It is for you to decide to insult or not, but it is my freedom to take it or not. You cannot force your insults on me. I simply refuse them; they are not worth it. You can take them back home; I refuse to take them.’

The people were bewildered. They couldn’t understand what the matter was. They said: ‘Please explain to us.’

He said: ‘Sit down and listen to me. In the last village I just passed, people had come with sweets and garlands, but my stomach was full, so I told them: “I won’t be able to eat anything. Please take your gifts back and give them to the other people in the town as prasad – my gift to the people of the town.” What do you think they did?

Somebody said: ‘They would have gone into the village and distributed the sweets.’

Buddha said: ‘Now listen – what will you do? You come with insults and I say that my stomach is full and I am not going to take these… Once I take your insult, I start punishing myself.’'

Osho, The True Sage – Talks on Hassidism, # 3

***

Zero Point

Osho: "We have become accutomed to ups and downs. When we are up, we feel good, when we are down, we feel bad. But just in the middle is a point that is neither up nor down; that is the neutral point.

Sometimes the neutral point is very frightening, because if one feels bad one knows what the case is; if one feels good one knows what is the case. But when one cannot feel either, one is simply in a kind of limbo and one is afraid. But that point is very beautiful. If you can accept it, that point will give you immense insight into your life. When you are up, the up disturbs you; all pleasures bring fever, excitement. And when you are down, again you are disturbed in a negative way. When you are up, you want to cling to that state; when you are down you want to get out of it. Something is there to work on and to remain occupied with, but when you are just in the middle, all fever is gone; it is a zero point.

Through that zero point one can have immense insight into oneself because all is silent. There is no happiness, there is no unhappiness, so there is no noise of any kind, there is utter quietness. Buddha used this point very deeply in his work with all his disciples. It was a must, everybody had to attain it first, and then the real work started. He calls it 'upeksha' - another name for neutrality."

***

Saying yes

Osho: “If you can say yes, a deep acceptance happens to you. If you say yes, how can you be complaining? How can you be miserable? Then everything is as it should be. You are not fighting, not denying - you accept. And remember, this acceptance is different from ordinary acceptance.

Ordinarily a person accepts a situation when he feels helpless; that is impotent acceptance. That will not lead you anywhere; impotence cannot lead you anywhere. A person accepts a situation when he feels hopeless: 'Nothing can be done, so what to do? At least accept, to save face.' Tantra acceptance is not that type of acceptance. It comes out of an over-fulfillment, it comes out of a deep contentment - not out of hopelessness, frustration, helplessness. It comes when you don't say no; it suddenly surfaces in you. Your whole being becomes a deep contentment.

That acceptance has a beauty of its own. It is not forced; you have not practiced for it. If you practice, it will be false; it will be hypocrisy. If you practice, you will be split in two: on the outside it will be acceptance; deep down, the turmoil, the negation, the denial. Deep down you will be boiling up to explode any moment. Just on the surface you will pretend that everything is okay.

Tantra acceptance is total; it doesn't split you. All the religions of the world, except Tantra, have created split personalities. Alle the religions of the world, except Tantra, have created schizophrenia. They split you. They make something bad in you and something good. And they say the good has to be achieved and the bad denied, the Devil has to be denied and God accepted. They create a split within you and a fight. Then you are continuously feeling guilty, because how can you destroy the part that is organically one with you? You may call it bad, you may call it names; it doesn't make any difference. How can you destroy it? You never created it. You have simply found it; it was given. Anger is there, sex is there, greed is there; you have not created them; they are given facts of life, just like your eyes and your hands. You can call them names, you can call them ugly or beautiful or whatsoever you life, but you cannot kill them.

Nothing can be killed out of existence; nothing can be destroyed. Tantra says a transformation is possible, but destruction, no!

And a transformation comes when you accept your total being. Then suddenly everything falls in line, then everything takes its own place; then anger is also absorbed, then greed is also absorbed. Then without trying to cut anything out of your being, your whole being rearranges itself. If you accept and say yes, a rearrangement happens, and whereas before there was a noisy clamor inside, now a melody - music is born, a harmony comes in.

Osho, Tantra: The Supreme Understanding Chapter 5

For one month only follow the yes, the part that says yes; for one month don't follow the part that says no. Give more cooperation to the yes; that is from where you will become united. 'No' never helps to attain unity. It is always 'yes' that helps, because yes is acceptance, yes is trust, yes is prayer! To be able to say yes is to be religious. So follow the yes.

The 'no' has not to be repressed, the second thing. If you repress it, it will take revenge. If you repress it, it will become more and more powerful and one day will explode and destroy your yes. So never repress the no. Just ignore it... and there is a great difference between repressing and ignoring. It is there, you know that.  You recognize it; you say: "Yes, I know you are there, but I am going to follow 'yes'" You don't repress it, you don't fight with it; you don't say: "Get out! Get lost! I don't want to do anything with you!" You don't say anything in anger at it. You don't want to push it away, you don't want to throw it in the basement of your unconsciousness, in the dark mind. No, you don't do anything to it. You simply recognize that it is there, but you are following the yes. With no grudge, with no complaint, with no anger, simply follow yes, not taking any attitude about no. Ignoring it, is the greatest art to kill the 'no'.

If you fight with it, you have become already a victim, a very subtle victim. The no has already won over you. When you fight with no, you have said no to no. That's how it has taken possession of you from the back door. Don't even say no even to no; just ignore it. For one month follow yes and don't fight with no. You will be surprised that by and by it becomes lean and thin because it is becoming starved. And one day suddenly you see it is no more there, and when it is no more there all the energy involved in it is released, and that released energy will make your yes a great stream.”

Osho, The Open Door, Chapter 7

***

The difference between being special and being unique

Osho, What is the difference between being special and being unique?

Osho: “Being unique is everybody’s nature; being special is relative. When you start feeling that you are special you are comparing yourself with somebody. Special is in comparison to somebody; unique, there is no comparison. Unique means you are alone as you are – how can you be compared? You cannot compare a car with an elephant. They are so different, how can you compare them? Each individual is so different from any other individual that there is no possibility of comparison.

Uniqueness is everybody’s nature, but specialness is comparative. Uniqueness is religious, specialness is political. When you claim that you are special, you are claiming that you are higher, superior to others; that others are lower, inferior to you. You bring the other in when you use the word ‘special’ and this is violent. To compare yourself with somebody in any way is violent because he is he and you are you, and you are both so different. The very idea of comparing is stupid.

Through comparison misery arises: either you feel you are inferior, then there is misery, or you start feeling you are superior, then too there is misery. If you feel superior, ego arises – and ego hurts. If you feel inferior, ego is wounded – and those wounds hurt. You may feel superior to one person, but what about others? You may one day or other come across somebody to whom you feel inferior. With one person you may feel intelligent, with another you may look like a pygmy. With one you may feel beautiful, with another you may start feeling ugly.

When you carry the idea of comparison, you are carrying seeds of illness which create misery and nothing else. Comparison creates hell. Heaven is an inner space where you live an uncompared life. You simply live yourself; it is your life, you are you. Just think of the beauty of it, the tremendous purity of it. You are simply you. Then you are beautiful. Are you ugly? Are you intelligent, or unintelligent? If you are simply you, and there is no comparison, how can you say you are this or that? Then both disappear. There arises neti-neti – neither this nor that. Then you are simply there.
 
Just think: the whole world disappears and you alone are left. God takes away the whole world and only you are left, nobody else. Then what will you be – strong, weak, intelligent, unintelligent, beautiful, ugly? Then who will you be? All comparisons will disappear, you will simply be yourself. That is the way to be.

Right now, be that! Don’t create unnecessary misery for yourself and for others. Start living your unique life.

Uniqueness is everybody’s nature. With the feeling of being special ambition enters, comparison enters, jealousy enters, conflict enters. You become political. Then you start pulling others down because you have to be superior. Then you start fighting, struggling, and then you start using all sorts of means. You have to prove and perform and your whole life is wasted in this nonsense.

Osho, Tao The Pathless Path Volume 2, #6

***

Only someone who loves himself can meditate
 
Osho: “I say: this is one of the most profound sutras of Buddha, and only an awakened person can give you such an insight:

He says, Love yourself… This can become the foundation of a radical transformation. Don’t be afraid of loving yourself. Love totally, and you will be surprised: The day you can get rid of all self-condemnation, self-disrespect – the day you can get rid of the idea of original sin, the day you can think of yourself as worthy and loved by existence – will be a day of great blessing. From that day onward you will start seeing people in their true light, and you will have compassion. And it will not be a cultivated compassion; it will be a natural, spontaneous flow.

And a person who loves himself can easily become meditative, because meditation means being with yourself. If you hate yourself, how can you be with yourself? And meditation is nothing but enjoying your beautiful aloneness. Celebrating yourself; that’s what meditation is all about.

Meditation is not a relationship; the other is not needed at all, one is enough unto oneself. One is bathed in one’s own glory, bathed in one’s own light. One is simply joyous because one is alive, because one is.

The greatest miracle in the world is that you are, that I am. To be is the greatest miracle – and meditation opens the doors of this great miracle. But only a man who loves himself can meditate; otherwise you are always escaping from yourself, avoiding yourself. Who wants to look at an ugly face, and who wants to penetrate into an ugly being? Who wants to go deep into one’s own mud, into one’s own darkness? Who wants to enter into the hell that you think you are? You want to keep this whole thing covered up with beautiful flowers and you want always to escape from yourself.

(…..) Love yourself, says Buddha, and then immediately he adds, and watch. That is meditation – that is Buddha’s name for meditation. But the first requirement is to love yourself, and then watch. If you don’t love yourself, and start watching, you may feel like committing suicide! Many Buddhists feel like committing suicide because they don’t pay attention to the first part of the sutra. They immediately jump to the second: “Watch yourself”.

(…..) First: Love yourelf and watch – today, tomorrow, always.

Create loving energy around yourself. Love your body, love your mind. Love your whole mechanism, your whole organism. By “love” is meant, accept it as it is. Don’t repress. We repress only when we hate something, we repress only when we are against something. Don’t repress, because if you repress, how are you going to watch? And we cannot look eye to eye at the enemy; we can look only in the eyes of our beloved. If you are not a lover of yourself you will not be able to look into your own eyes, into your own face, into your own reality.”

Osho, Love, Freedom and Aloneness

***

Transforming anger

Osho: “If a person is growing rightly, anger will play an important part in his life. Anger has its own colour. If it is removed, then the picture of man’s life will be in some sense incomplete, some colour will be missing. But from childhood you start teaching children to repress certain qualities, and the result of repressing these qualities is that the child will slowly suppress whatever you call bad, he will suppress it in himself. And a suppressed heart becomes weak, because its strings are not rightly tuned. And this suppression will happen in the mind because your education does not go deeper than the mind.

When you tell children that anger is bad, this teaching will not reach to the heart. The heart has no ears to listen with and no words to think with. This teaching will go into the mind, and the mind cannot change the heart. So now a problem is created: the mind centre thinks that anger is wrong, but the heart centre does not; it has no connection with the mind. So every day you become angry, and every day you repent and decide not to be angry again, but the next morning you wake up and again you get angry. You are surprised because you have decided so many times not to get angry, yet it still happens.

You don’t know that the centre which feels angry is different from the mind centre. The centre which decides ‘I will not be angry’ is absolutely different from the centre which becomes angry. They are two totally different centres. So decisions and repentance do not have any effect on your anger: you go on being angry and you go on regretting it and you go on feeling upset about it. You do not understand that these two centres are so separate that the decision taken by the one does not reach the other at all… so man disintegrates within.

The heart centre works in certain ways, and needs certain things to develop. If the mind interferes in that centre, it will become disturbed and chaotic. Everybody’s heart centre has become absolutely chaotic, absolutely disturbed. Certainly the first thing is that anger should be transformed – but it should not be destroyed.

So the first key to tighten the strings of the heart is to develop all the qualities of the heart; none should be destroyed. You may be a little puzzled: does one need to develop anger? I say to you that one certainly has to develop anger, because anger can one day be transformed and become compassion. Otherwise compassion can never arise. If you read the life story of the most compassionate people in the world, you will find that in their early days they were very angry people. Anger has its own dignity and its own pride. (…)

According to me, all the heart qualities within man should be intensely and extremely developed; this should be the priority. Only if there is extreme development can there be transformation. All transformation takes place at extreme points, no transformation happens below that. If water is heated, it does not evaporate when it is lukewarm. Lukewarm water is also water, but at hundred degrees, when the water reaches its ultimate temperature, then a transformation takes place and the water starts evaporating. Water turns into vapor at a hundred degrees, it does not become vapor before that. Lukewarm water does not become vapor.

You are all lukewarm people – no transformation can take place in your life. All the qualities of your mind and of your heart should be developed to the utmost; only then can there be a revolution in them. Only then can there be a change. When anger has an intensity it can be transformed into compassion, otherwise not.

But you are the enemies of anger, of greed, of passion and so you become just lukewarm people. Then life remains just lukewarm and no transformation can ever happen. This luke-warmness has had a tremendously harmful effect on human beings.

In my vision, the first thing that has to be understood is that all the qualities of your personality, of your heart, should develop rightly. Intense anger has a beauty of its own which may not be apparent to you. Intense anger has a radiance, an energy, a meaning. It contributes to the personality in its own way. All the feelings of the heart should be intensely developed.

So the first point is that the qualities of the heart should be developed, not destroyed.

What is the second point? The second point is that there should be awareness, but no suppression. The more you suppress the feelings of the heart, the more they become unconscious. (…)

We lose sight of whatever we suppress; it moves into darkness. All the energies of the heart should be clearly looked at. If you feel angry, don’t try to suppress it by chanting ‘Rama, Rama’. If you feel angry, sit alone in a room, close the door and meditate on the anger. See the anger totally – ‘What is this anger? What is the energy of this anger? From where does this anger arise? Why does it arise? How does it surround my mind and influence me?

In aloneness, meditate on anger. See the anger totally, understand it, recognise it – from where does it arise, why does it arise? Then, slowly slowly, you will become a master of anger. And the person who becomes a master of his anger has great power, great strength. He becomes strong, he becomes a master of himself.

So it is not a question of fighting with the anger, it is a question of knowing the anger – because remember, there is no greater energy than knowing and there is no greater stupidity than to fight with one’s own energies. A person who is fighting with his own energies is committing the same mistake as a man who is wrestling with his own hands. If one hand is wrestling with the other, no hand will ever be able to win because they both belong to the same person. The energy is flowing in both hands, and if there is a fight between these two hands the energy will be dissipated, there can be no question of winning. In this kind of fight you will be defeated. All your energy will be wasted.

Whose energy is in the anger? – It is your own energy. The energy is yours, but you are the one who is fighting it. If you divide yourself and fight, you will go on breaking apart; you will disintegrate, you will not be a whole person. There can be no attainment in life other than defeat for the person who fights with himself. There cannot be, it is impossible. Do not fight. Know your energies, recognise them, be acquainted with them.

So the second point is not suppression but awareness. Do not suppress. Whenever, whatever energy arises within you, do not suppress it. You are a collection of unknown energies. You are the centre of very unknown energies with which you have no acquaintance, of which you have no awareness. (…)

Knowing makes you a master. Within you, many energies greater than electricity are alight, they shine. Anger glows, hatred glows, love glows. You become afraid of what is happening, because you do not know what all these energies are. (…)

Make your life an inner laboratory and start knowing all these energies within – watch them, recognise them. Never suppress, even unintentionally. Never be afraid, even by mistake, but try to know whatever is within you. If anger comes, then feel fortunate and be thankful to the person who has made you angry: he has given you an opportunity – some energy has arisen within you and now you can look at it. Look at it silently, in aloneness; search to see what it is.

The more your knowing grows, the deeper your understanding will become. The more you become a master of your anger, the more you will find that it is under your control. The day you become a master of your anger, will be the day you can transform it.

You can transform only that which you are master of; you cannot change that which you are not a master of. And remember, you can never be a master of something that you fight with, because it is impossible to become the master of an enemy; one can only be the master of a friend. If you become an enemy of the energies within yourself, then you can never become master of them. You can never win without love and friendship.

Neither be afraid of nor condemn the infinite treasure of the energies within you. Start knowing what is hidden within you. (…)

So the second key to keep in mind is that you should not suppress any of your energies: you should know them, recognise them, look into them and see them. From this you will have a very surprising experience: if you try to look at anger, if sitting silently you look deeply into it, then the anger will disappear. As you watch the anger, it disappears. (…)

Then you will realise that you have discovered an amazing method: you will have discovered that only in unconsciousness do anger, sex and greed have power over you. Watching them, bringing your awareness to them, they all disappear.

I had a friend who had a problem with anger. He said: “I am very disturbed by it and how much it is beyond my control. Show me a method to control it without me having to do something myself – because I have almost given up, I don’t think I can do anything about it. I don’t think that I can get out of this anger by my own efforts.”

I gave him a paper on which were written the words: ‘Now I am getting angry’. I told him: “Keep this paper in your pocket, and whenever you feel angry, take it out, read it and put it back again”. And I said: “You can do at least this much, this is the minimum; I can’t give you less to do. Read this paper and then put it back in your pocket”.

After two or three months, when I met him again, I asked: “What happened?”

He said: “I am surprised. This paper has worked like a mantra. Whenever I feel angry I take it out of my pocket. The moment I take it out, my hands and feet become numb. As I am putting my hand in my pocket, I realise that I am feeling angry and then something in my loosens up; the grip that the anger used to have on my inside suddenly disappears. As my hand goes into the pocket, it relaxes and there is no longer any need to even read the paper. When I feel the anger I start seeing the paper in my pocket”. He asked me: “How did the paper have this effect? What is the secret?”

I said: “There is no secret to it. It is simple: whenever you are unconscious, the perversions, the imbalances and the chaos of the mind take hold of you. But when you become aware everything disappears”.

So watching will have two results: first, your knowledge of your own energies will develop and knowing them makes you the master; and second: the strength of the grip which these energies have on you will decrease. Slowly, slowly you will find that at first anger comes and then you watch; then after a while, gradually, you will find that when anger comes, the watchfulness will come at the same time. And finally you will find that when the anger is about to arise, the watchfulness is already there. From the day when the watchfulness comes before the anger, there will no longer be any possibility for anger to arise. (…)

Awareness of things before they happen has a value. Being sorry has no value, because it happens afterward, and nothing can be done afterward. Crying and weeping later on is futile because it is impossible to undo whatever has happened. There is no chance of going back, no way, no door. But whatever has not happened yet can be changed. Being sorry is simply experiencing pain after something has happened. It is meaningless, it is absolutely unintelligent. You became angry – this was a mistake; and now you are sorry – this is one more mistake. You are becoming unnecessarily disturbed. It has no value. What is needed is an awareness beforehand. Such an awareness will develop as you slowly, slowly watch all the emotions of the heart.

So the second key is watching and not suppressing.

And the third key is transformation.

Each quality of the heart can be transformed. Everything has many forms, everything can change into an opposite form. There is no quality or energy which cannot be diverted toward good, toward benediction. And remember, that which can become bad can always become good; that which can become harmful can always become helpful. Helpful and harmful, good and bad are directions. It is only a question of transforming by changing the direction and things will become different. (…)

The third point is to keep a continuous check on which direction it is that deepens your joy. There is no need to ask anybody else. You can use this criterion every day, in your daily life. The criterion is bliss. It is just like the criterion for testing gold by rubbing it on a stone; the goldsmith will throw away whatever is not pure and put whatever is pure into his vault. Go on checking every day using the criterion of bliss, see what is right and what is wrong. Whatever is wrong can be thrown away, and whatever is right will slowly start accumulating like a treasure.”

Osho: The Inner Journey #7

***

The value of storms

Osho: “Growth means that you are absorbing something new every day, and that absorption is possible only if you are open; now your windows and doors are open. Sometimes the rain comes in and the wind comes in, the sun comes - and life moves within you. So you will feel a few disturbances: your newspaper will start moving in the wind, the papers on the table will be disturbed, and if the rain starts coming in, your clothes may become wet.

If you have always lived in a closed room, you will ask: “What is happening?”. Something beautiful is happening. It is good to be available to the wind, to the rain, to the sun, because this is what life is. So rather than becoming worried about it, dance. Dance when the storm comes, because silence will follow. Dance when challenges come and disturb your life, because in responding to those challenges you will be growing to new heights. Remember, even suffering is a grace. If one can take it rightly, it becomes a stepping-stone.

People who have never suffered and have lived a convenient and comfortable life are almost dead. Their lives will not be like a sharp sword. It will not even cut vegetables. Intelligence becomes sharp when you face challenges. Pray every day to God: “Send me more challenges tomorrow, send more storms” and then you will know life to the optimum.”

***

The base of all fear

Beloved Master,

What is fear?

Osho: "There are fears and fears; I am not talking about them. I am talking about the most fundamental fear - all other fears are faraway echoes of the basic fear - and that fear is of death. Life is surrounded by death. You see every day somebody dying - something dying; something that was alive a moment before is dead.

Each death reminds you of your own death.

It is impossible to forget your own death; every moment there is a reminder. So the first thing to be understood is that the only possibility of getting rid of fear is to get rid of death. And you can get rid of death, because death is only an idea, not a reality.

You have only seen other people dying; have you ever seen yourself dying? And when you see somebody else dying, you are an outsider, not a participant in the experience. The experience is happening inside the person. All that you know is that he is no longer breathing, that his body has become old, that his heart is no longer beating. But do you think all these things put together are equivalent to life? Is life only breathing? Is life only the heartbeat, the blood circulating and keeping the body warm? If this is life, it is not worth the game. If only my breathing is my life, what is the point of going on breathing?

Life must be something more. To be of any value life must have something of eternity in it; it must be something beyond death. And you can know it, because it exists within you. Life exists within you - death is only an experience of others, outside observers.

It is simply like love. Can you understand love by seeing a person being loving to someone? What will you see? They are hugging each other, but is hugging love? You may see they are holding hands together, but is holding hands love? From the outside, what else can you discover about love? Anything that you discover will be absolutely futile. These ware expressions of love, but not love itself. Love is something one knows only when one is in it.

One of the greatest poets of India, Rabindranath Tagore, was very much embarrassed by an old man who was his grandfather's friend. The old man often used to come because he lived in the neighborhood, and he would never leave the house without creating trouble for Rabindranath. He would certainly knock on his doors and ask: "How is your poetry going? Do you really know God? Do you really know love? Tell me, do you know all these things that you talk about in your poetry? Or are you just articulate with words? Any idiot can talk about love, about God, about the soul. but I don't see in your eyes that you have experienced anything."

And Rabindranath could not answer him. In fact he was right. The old man would meet him in the marketplace and hold him and ask him: "What about your God, have you found him? Or are you still writing poetry about him? Remember, talking about God is not knowing God."

He was a very embarrassing person. In poets' gatherings, where Rabindranath was very much respected - he was a Nobel prize winner - that old man was bound to reach. On the stage, before all the poets and worshippers of Rabindranath, he would hold him by his collar and would say: "Still it has not happened. Why are you deceiving these idiots? They are smaller idiots, you are a bigger idiot; they are not known outside the land, you are known all over the world - but that does not mean that you know God."

Rabindranath has written in his diary: "I was so much harassed by him, and he had such penetrating eyes that it was impossible to tell a lie to him. His very presence was such that either you had to say the truth, or you had to remain silent."
But one day it happened. Rabindranath had gone for a morning walk. In the night it had rained; it was very early morning and the sun was rising. In the ocean it was all gold, and by the side of the streets water had gathered in small pools. In those small pools also the sun was rising with the same glory, with the same color, with the same joy. And just this experience - that in existence there is nothing superior and nothing inferior, that all is one whole - suddenly triggered something in him. For the first time in his life he went to the old man's house, knocked on the door, looked into the eyes of the old man and said: "Now, what do you say?"

He said: "Now there is nothing to say. It has happened. I bless you."

The experience of your immortality, of your eternity, of your wholeness, of your oneness with existence is always possible. It only needs some triggering experience.

So the first thing is to get rid of death. All fears will disappear. You don't habve to work on each single fear; otherwise it will take lives and still you will not be able to get rid of them.

Fear is natural, because death is known by everybody around. Guilt is not natural; it is created by religions. They have made every man guilty - guilty of a thousand and one things, so burdened with guilt that they cannot sing, they cannot dance, they cannot enjoy anything. The guilt poisons everything. All the religions have conspired against innocent human beings to make them guilty, because without making them guilty they cannot be made into slaves. And slaves are needed. For a few people's lust for power, millions of people are needed to be enslaved. For a few people to become Alexander the Great, millions have to be reduced to a sub-human status.

But all these are simply conditionings in the mind, which you can erase as easily as writing in the sands on a beach. Just don't be afraid, because those writings you have accepted as holy, you have accepted as coming from very respectable sources, from great founders of religions. It does not matter. Only one thing matters: that your mind should be completely cleaned, utterly empty and silent.

There is no need of Moses or Jesus or Buddha to reside inside you. You need a totally silent, clean space. And only that space can bring you not only to me, but to yourself, to existence itself.

The religions of  the world have given so many diseases to man that they are uncountable. One of the diseases is that they have made every man ambitious for reward - if not in this world then in the other world. They have made man so greedy, and at the same time they are all talking against greed. But their whole religion is based on greed.

Religions have done such harm that they cannot be forgiven. They have taken away all dignity of man - his joy of longing, of love, his pleasure in waiting, his trust that the spring will come. They have taken everything away from you. You will be rewarded only if you do certain rituals which have no relationship, no relevance.

A simple and innocent religion would have changed the whole earth. But the cunning priests would not allow a pure and innocent and childlike religion, with wondering eyes, with joy, not bothering about stupid ideas about heaven and hell but living each moment with great love. And waiting for more - not desiring, but by waiting, deserving, creating more and more space, silence, so that the spring comes. And not only a few flowers, but so many flowers...

One of the Sufi mystics has a small poem about it: "I had waited long for the spring - it came. And it came so abundantly, with so many flowers, that there was not a place left where I could make a nest for myself."

Life gives abundantly; you just have to be a recipient. But never wait for any reward.

I want you to be absolutely innocent of all religious corruption and pollution. Have a silent, loving mind, waiting for more to happen. Life is so much that we go on exploring it - but we cannot exhaust it. The mystery is timeless."

Osho, The Golden Future # 12

***

Everything failed

A young man says: “All that I have achieved is lost. A tremendous sadness arises and I can’t perceive the end of it – or is there no end?”

Osho: “Many should feel jealous of you. To know that all has failed is the beginning of a new search for something that cannot be lost.

When one is utterly disillusioned with the world and all its successes, only then does one become spiritual.

You may not yet be aware of it, but something is stirring, a new joy is arising behind the curtain of sadness – a joy of a new search, of a new adventure, of a new life, of a new way to be.

“I can’t perceive the end of it – or is there no end?”

There is a beginning of the mind and there is an end of the mind, there is a beginning of the ego and there is an end of the ego, but there is no beginning to you and no end to you. And there is no beginning to the mystery of existence and no end to it.

It is an ongoing process. Mysteries upon mysteries are waiting for you, hence the thrill and the ecstasy.

Feel ecstatic that there is no end to life, that when you have reached one peak, suddenly another peak starts giving you challenges – a higher one, a more arduous climb, a more dangerous reach. And when you have reached the other peak, there will be another peak; peaks upon peaks. It is an eternal Himalayas of life.

Just think of a point where you arrive, and now there is nothing else left. You will be utterly bored then; boredom will be your only fate then! And life is not boredom, it is a dance. Life is not boredom, it is exultation, exuberance.

Many things are going to happen, and many things will always remain to happen. The mystery never ends, it cannot end. That’s why it is called a mystery, it cannot even be known.

It will never become knowledge, that’s shy it is called a mystery; something in it is eternally elusive. And that’s the whole joy of life. The great splendour of life is that it keeps you eternally engaged, searching, exploring. Life is exploration, life is adventure.

Ecstasy is our very nature; not to be ecstatic is simply unnecessary. To be ecstatic is natural, spontaneous. It needs no effort to be ecstatic, it needs great effort to be miserable.

That’s why you look so tired, because misery is really hard work; to maintain it is really difficult, because you are doing something against nature. You are going upstream – that’s what misery is.

And what is bliss? Going with the river – so much so that the distinction between you and the river is simply lost. You are the river. How can it be difficult? To go with the river no swimming is needed; you simply float with the river and the river takes you to the ocean. The river is already going to the ocean.

Life is a river. Don’t push it and you will not be miserable.

Osho, The Book of Wisdom

 ***
 
Start with effort

Osho: “Meditation techniques are doings, because you are advised to do something. Even to meditate is to do something, even to sit silently is to do something, even to not do anything is a sort of doing. So in a superficial way, all meditation techniques are doings. But in a deeper way they are not, because if you succeed in them, the doing disappears.

Only in the beginning it appears like an effort. If you succeed in it, the effort disappears and the whole thing becomes spontaneous and effortless. If you succeed in it, it is not a doing. No effort on your part is needed then. It becomes just like breathing - it is there. But in the beginning the effort is bound to be, because the mind cannot do anything which is not an effort. If you tell it to be effortless, the whole thing seems absurd.

In Zen, where much emphasis is paid to effortlessness, the masters say to the disciples: "Just sit. Don't do anything." And the disciple tries. Of course, what can you do other than trying?

In the beginning, effort will be there, doing will be there, but only in the beginning as a necessary evil. But you have to remember constantly that you have to go beyond it. A moment must come when you are not doing anything about meditation - just being there and it happens; just sitting or standing and it happens; not doing anything, just being aware, it happens.

All these techniques are just to help you to come to an effortless moment. The inner transformation, the inner realization cannot happen through effort, because effort is a sort of tension. With effort you cannot be relaxed totally; the effort will become a barrier. With this background in mind, if you make effort, by and by you will become capable of leaving it also.”

Osho, The Book of Secrets #50

***

Start from the circumference


Osho: "Total relaxation is the ultimate. That's the moment when one becomes a buddha. That is the moment of realization, enlightenment, christ-consciousness.

You cannot be totally relaxed right now. At the innermost core a tension will persist.

But start relaxing. Start from the circumference - that's where we are, and we can start only from where we are. Relax the circumference of your being - relax your body. (...)

You will have to relax from the circumference. The first step in relaxing is the body. Remember as many times as possible to look into the body, whether you are carrying some tension in the body somewhere - in the neck, in the head, in the legs. Relax it consciously. Just go to that part of the body, and persuade that part. Say to it lovingly “Relax”.

And you will be surprised that if you just approach any part of your body lovingly, it listens, it follows you - it is your body. With closed eyes, go inside the body from the toe to the head searching for any place where there is a tension.

And then talk to that part as you talk to a friend; let there be a dialogue between you and your body. Tell it to relax, and tell it, "There is nothing to fear. Don't be afraid. I am here to take care - you can relax". Slowly, slowly you will learn the knack of it. Then the body becomes relaxed.

Then take another step, a little deeper; tell the mind to relax. And if the body listens, mind also listens, but you cannot start with the mind - you have to start from the beginning. You cannot start from the middle. Many people start with the mind and they fail; they fail because they start from a wrong place. Everything should be done in the right order.

If you become capable of relaxing the body voluntarily, then you will be able to help your mind relax voluntarily. Mind is a more complex phenomenon.

Osho, The Dhammapada: The way of the Buddha, Vol 1, #8

***

Remain with the Moment

And because of this mind who is always on journey you can never be in touch with the real. You eat but you miss eating, the flavour, the taste, the smell, you miss it. You simply go on throwing things inside. It is ugly. But why you miss? Because the mind goes on thinking. You are thinking thousand and one things while you are eating.

Says Rinzai, that when I eat I only eat and when I sleep I only sleep. Somebody said nothing is special in it, everybody is doing it. Rinzai laughed and said:  is everybody is doing it everybody is a buddha. Everybody is enlightened then. Eating simply eat, be with it. Walking simply walk. Be there. Don’t go ahead, don’t jump here and there. Mind always goes ahead or lags behind.

Remain with the moment. In the beginning it will be very difficult to remain with the moment. And sometimes the moment will not be very happy. You are angry. Then the mind start thinking of repentence. Or trying to do something so that the anger never happens again. Sometimes you are sad, you put on the radio or the tv, you start reading a book, because you would not like to be sad. You want to divert the mind. And because miserable moments are more than happy moments it becomes a constant habbit and when it is fixed, even when happiness comes you are not found at home, you are found somewhere else.

Make it a point: whatsoever, sadness, anger, whatsoever, depression, unhappiness, be with it. And you will suddenly become surprised, that when you remain with sadness sadness changes into a beautiful thing. Sadness becomes a depth. If you remain with anger, not thinking about, just being with, anger is transformed. It becomes forgiveness. If you remain with sex, sex takes a different quality, it becomes love.

If you start living with the moment you will see your ‘being with’ is a miracle, it has a magic to it. Happiness will become deeper. Ordinarily your happiness is just on the surface. Deep down you carry millions of things. Just on the surface it is. If you remain with it it will become deeper and deeper and deeper. If you start ‘living with’ everything is transformed because you bring a new quality of being, of awareness, of witnessing. Don’t fight against sadness and don’t hanker about happiness, because that is going away, astray.

Have you observed? If you go for a holiday to the Himalayas or to Switzerland, for months you plan. To arrive there. And the moment you arrive your mind has already started to plan when to depart. How to go back home. Look, for months you plan how to arrive, and when you arrive or not even arrive, just on the way, and your mind has started to go back. How to depart? Your every arrival is just the beginning of a departure. And you are never there, because you can not be there.

Again back home you will start thinking. Back home you will start thinking: what happened in the Himalayas. What beautiful experiences you went through. And you were never there. It is as if you have read about them, it is as if somebody else has told you. You look at the memory as if the memory functions on its own. It takes photographs and becomes an album. Back home you will open the album and see and you will say to friends: beautiful, and you will start planning again, next year, you are going to the Himalayas.

Mind is never where you are. Awareness is always there where you are. Drop more and more mind and minding and become more and more aware and alert. Bring yourself together in the moment. Difficult in the beginning. Because of the old habbit it will go again and again, bring it back. No need to fight, simply call it back: come! Again it will go within seconds. It will not be there. Call it back again. And by and by when you start enjoying this moment, the eternal now, the only time that there is, only existence that there is, the only life that there is, when you start enjoying it, more and more, the mind will be coming to it less and less; it will be going. Then a tuning happens, suddenly you are here, at home, and the reality is revealed. The reality was always there, you were not there. It is not the truth that has to be sought, it is you who has to be brought home.

***

Osho on the Dynamic Meditation

Before you read this blog, you can see what the Osho Dynamic Meditation is, via this link.

Osho: "Dynamic is a contradiction. The dynamic means effort, much effort, absolute effort, and meditation means silence, no effort, no activity. You can call it a dialectical meditation. Be so active that the whole energy becomes a movement, no energy is left static in you.

The whole energy has been called forth, nothing is left behind. All the frozen parts of energy are melting, flowing. You are not a frozen thing now, you have become dynamic. You are not like substance now, you are more like energy. You are not material, you have become electrical. Bring total energy to work, to be active, moving.

When everything is moving and you have become a cyclone, then become alert. Remember, be mindful - and in this cyclone suddenly you will find a centre which is absolutely silent. This is the centre of the cyclone. This is you - you in your divinity, you as a God.

All around you is activity. Your body has become an active cyclone - everything is moving fast, faster. All the frozen parts have melted, you are flowing. You have become a volcano, a fire, electricity. But just in the centre, amidst all this movement, there is a non-moving point, the still point.

This still point is not to be created. It is there, you are not to do anything about it. It has always been there. It is your very being, the very ground of your being. This is what Hindus have been calling the atman, the soul. It is there, but unless your body, unless your material existence becomes totally active, you will not be aware of it. With total activity the totally inactive becomes apparent. The activity gives you a contrast. It becomes the blackboard, and on the blackboard is the white dot. On a white wall you cannot see a white dot; on a blackboard the white dot appears to you.

So when your body has become active, dynamic, a movement, suddenly you become aware of a point which is still, absolutely still - the unmoving centre of the whole moving world. That is effortless. No effort is done for it. No effort is needed, it is simply revealed. Effort on the part of the periphery, no effort on the part of the centre. Movement on the periphery, stillness at the centre. Activity on the periphery, absolute inactivity at the centre. Effort and effortlessness, movement and no movement, activity and no activity, matter and the soul - these are the banks. And between these two flows the invisible, that which cannot ben seen, that which is really a subtle balance, nothing else, between these two - that art thou."

Osho - My Way of the White Clouds #4

***

You don't have to empty your plate

When you are told as a child that you have to empty your plate (because otherwise your mother would have cooked for nothing, or because children in poor countries have no food to eat) you are distracted from your natural hunger - and feelings of satiety.

You then learn not to rely on knowing from the inside what the right amount of food is for you. This can lead to eating problems later on.

I know the guilt of throwing away food. Because in her youth my mother was in the Japanese concentration camp and was so hungry there that every crumb of food was so welcome. It's about not identifying myself with her. What I learned from it was that I appreciate food.

There is also no need to throw away the food left over on your plate.
You can save it for the next day.
What can also help is to put less food on your plate. You can always add something. With less food on your plate, you can probably enjoy your food more.

I'm curious about your response: have you learned to empty your plate? Do you think you should? And do you encourage your children to eat everything, even if they are no longer hungry or no longer want to eat?
Has there been food scarcity in your family, and how has that affected your eating behaviour?

***

Moving away from your inner criticism

I share some helpful techniques to move away from your inner criticism:

(from the (Dutch) book: "inner criticism in eating disorders ' by Greta Noordenbos & Marieke ten Napel):

View your criticism from a distance:

Observe which critical thought you have.

Then put this sentence before that thought:

'I have the thought that ... '

Then extend the sentence you put before it with:

'I note that I have the thought that ... '

Put also the following sentence before your critical thought:

'I don't want to notice again and again any more that I have the thought that ... '

Observe what happens then with your critical thought.

Another technique from this book:

Opposite each negative thought you have, you put two positive thoughts. In this way the nerve network of positive thoughts in your brain grows.

***

The eating disorder gives a fake support

In anorexia nervosa the eating disorder gives a kind of support because you get a sense of control of your body. You are able not to eat, despite hunger, and to force your body in the shape that you want. Your day is settled: counting calories and lots and lots of movement.

Also in binge-eating and emotional eating the eating disorder gives a kind of support: eating gives a comfortable feeling, a moment for yourself, a feeling of fullness.

But in the end it turns out to be a fake kind of support. The disadvantages of the eating disorder (social isolation, the obsession with food and not being able to be occupied with anything else, the feeling of shame when you have eaten too much and the emotional flattening in anorexia, the physical effects of the eating disorder) are slowly slowly much greater than the advantage of the feeling of support. 

Underneath the eating disorder are things like low self-esteem, a negative body image, not being able to sense emotions and feelings, being too much concerned with meeting the expectations of others, afraid of emotions such as anger and sadness. The eating disorder prevents you looking at and working on that. Out of fear you postpone to deal with the eating disorder and to make space for the inspiring life that you'd like to live, but which you are afraid of at the same time.

Sometimes you manage to deal with the eating disorder through a self-help book or a peer support group. But very often it is better to also seek professional guidance, because many pitfalls for falling back into your old eating patterns often emerge.

***

Eating problems of women from a feminist perspective

Susie Orbach describes eating disorders from a feminist point of view - from the role that food has for the woman.

An eating disorder is often a rebellion against the role of the woman as the one who prepares the meals for other members of the family, while at the same time she is expected to be so slim that she almost can't eat anything. Both women who develop anorexia as women who develop bulimia and overeating often unconsciously rebel against this role they get assigned. They rebel against the slimness ideal by having a full body or (with anorexia) by becoming extremely thin.

I think that almost every woman is influenced by this, whether it has led to an eating disorder or not. For me this point of view contributes to compassion for what we carry as a woman concerning the attitude towards our bodies.

***

Anorexia and Bulimia regarding the family system

The causes of Anorexia and Bulimia are often on another (deeper) level as we usually think and experienc
 
Below follows a vision of Bert Hellinger (founder of family constellations) on eating disorders:

“If people with anorexia are improving, they sometimes get bulimia. That means: they eat and spit it back out. That is the inner conflict between leaving and staying. So if the goodbye of anorexia has not yet been completely successful then they eat. That means that they say inwardly: 'I stay'. Then they spit the food out again and that means: 'I am leaving'. The solution is that the child, when it wants to spit out her food again, says to the father: 'I stay and eat'.

In bulimia (eating and then vomiting) there are different dynamics. It may lead to bulimia for example if the mother says to her children: 'What comes from father is not right, you are not to take what comes from him'. Then the child takes from the mother and spits it back out to honour the father. This is one of the dynamics. This form of bulimia heals if the child takes from both parents and especially from the father.

Now it is often the case that anorexia turns into bulimia. Then there is another dynamic. Here anorexia means: 'I want to die' and eating means here: 'I want to live'. If the bulimia patient eats, she says: 'I want to live'. If she vomits the food, she says: 'I want to die'. Vomiting is a continuation of the anorexia then. Here the solution for the patient with bulimia is that she says: 'I stay'. Like that, very humble. And that the parents, for example her father, says to her: 'I stay'.

Eating and Fasting

Eating means, I stay. Fasting means, I leave. Some people eat more than they need, because they are afraid that they have to leave. If they want to eat more then, they can inwardly say: 'I remain'. Then they might eat only as much as they need.

Sometimes eating lots of food comes instead of taking a person, for example the rejected mother or a deceased brother of sister who was forgotten in the family. When someone takes the rejected or forgotten person in his heart, the longing for lots of food comes to an end.

Food Addiction

Participant of a group of Bert Hellinger: “I want to say something about food addictional because I used to have this in the past. I would like to say it to the other women with food addiction here. I once read in a book that it can help to imagine that your father takes you on his lap and feeds you. My father has never done that with me and then I thought: 'I would love it so much to have a father on whose lap I am allowed to sit and who feeds me'. I did it then and it has benefitted me so much. Now I don't have a food addiction any more.

When I tell this to other people with a food addiction in self-help groups, they say that this is not possible, because who once is addicted, is addicted forever. But I know that for hears now already, I don't have a food addiction any more. It is not a problem any more for me. It is just beautiful that someone has given me that advice. Imagine, you sit on your father's lap at dinner - everyone is present - and he feeds you.” “

Bert Hellinger, translated by me (Modita van Zummeren) from the Dutch book: 'De Wijsheid is voortdurend onderweg'

***

The confrontation with food is always there
 
An addiction related to food is different than other addictions (like alcohol, smoking or drugs for example) in the sense of:

~ She is visible: the amount you eat shows in the size of your body. This makes the addiction visible to yourself and to others (what can be camouflaged if you start compensating for overeating by sports or vomiting)

This can increase the feeling of being under pressure from outside.

~ You always have to do with food and you cannot not-eat or not having food in your home (in contrast to alcohol, smoking or drugs)

This makes it more difficult, as you are, because of this, continuously exposed to the temptation.

***


Eating disorders because of the loss of a twin


Yesterday I experienced during a family constellation how wanting to give too much to others has to do with the loss of my unborn twin (my twin sister died while she was in the womb with me). All this time I've felt guilty about her death. When my guilt got a place during the constellation, I could let go of giving too much to others and also start taking.

One in six pregnancies is twins, triplets, or quadruplets. Often the unborn twin dies early in pregnancy, and many people discover this theme in their lives only during a craniosacral session, a family constellation or by reading a book about it.

I realize that the loss of my twin sister contributed to my anorexia and bulimia. During my anorexia, I didn't eat because I felt guilty that I was still alive while my twin sister had died. With bulimia, I repeated my experience in the womb: I ate as much as possible because I felt that otherwise I would not survive: I felt that if both of us would live, neither of us would make it. I am grateful to my twin sister for giving me the space to continue living.

After the constellation I felt such a relief. I had given the guilt a place.

The fact that I can also take now, is a relief for the other. Nobody wants you to be given too much because this disturbs the balance in the contact.

I also noticed that the rush in my work has disappeared. I can take a rest now before, during and after my activities.

I think this is the beauty of family constellations: that something in our lives can change so fundamentally because we tackle the root cause.

On this website you find more information about familyconstellations.

***

Eating disorders out of love for a family member

Someone with an eating disorder often carries something from the family system

Unresolved things from the family system can ultimately lead to someone developing an eating disorder. The background is always love for the relevant family member.

For example, when the entanglement within the family system becomes visible in someone who is overweight, a healing movement can occur and a person can then often lose weight much more easily.

You can read more about family constellations on this website. Also read the blogs I refer to on this page, which give you more insight into what family constellations can do for you.

***

Eating problems and sexuality



 

When I read many books on eating problems before writing my Dutch book ‘Hunger for Fulfillment’ about causes and the liberation of eating disorders, and by reviewing my own experiences, I notice how closely eating problems and sexuality are related.

 

My eating disorders have arisen at the time I felt very much uncomfortable at puberty with regard to sexuality; I saw the attraction happening between boys and girls around me which made me afraid. When I got a comment about 'getting a tummy' in the changing room of the gym, I started eating less which evolved in anorexia nervosa. I could be occupied now with losing weight and counting calories and turned away from everything around sexuality. I got an asexual body in fact.

When I was so skinny, all feelings of enjoyment disappeared out of my body and my emotions were flat, grizzled and gray. It felt quite safe not longer to be in danger to be attractive for boys. More factors in my life contributed to that, about which I will write in my book.

Also when I got bulimia, after six years of anorexia, I didn't notice any sexual feelings. I was disgusted by my obese body and ate away all my emotions as much as possible. Becoming thicker pulled down my self-esteem and again I was unattractive for others in my own eyes.

I also noticed that by my serious, performance-oriented attitude, I could not see sexuality as something playful, romantic and adventurous, which you can enjoy. I was more concerned with a sense of duty (not to become pregnant, being responsible, wanting to take care of the other) than that I came up for my own needs. This turns out to be the case for many people with eating disorders.

Often it is so threatening, when you have an eating disorder, to start developing an healthy attitude towards sexuality, that it is easier to first work on overcoming the eating disorder. This gives a sense of control, which is needed to risk losing control in sexuality.

To be sexually attractive has finally nothing to do with the shape of your body.

Osho: "Buddhahood is becoming aware of the inner sky that was in the rock, in the animals, in the trees, in man and in woman. Once you become aware of that inner sky, you are released from all forms. That is freedom. Not that you become free, because in that freedom you don't exist, you can't exist.

'You become free' simply means you become free from yourself."

***

Depressed because of an eating disorder

Depression can be a cause of an eating disorder, but depression can also be caused by the eating disorder.

If you don't eat enough, all your energy is needed to survive and also the gut flora is not healthy any more. The guts produce 80% of your happiness hormones. Also when you eat too much (unhealthy food) your gut flora gets disturbed, and feelings of shame and guilt arise which can cause depression.

Often it is best to first deal with the eating disorder.

It can happen that the depression disappears then, but it can also happen that depression comes up when the eating disorder disappears, because you had suppressed it with the eating disorder.

***

The right balance with food

As part of a colon cleanse (with biofilm detox), I ate half of normal for five days. I then noticed that I was hardly hungry and felt much more energetic. I found out that I need less food than I normally use, and that I make the intestines work unnecessarily if I eat more than necessary.

I assumed that at an older age (I am now almost 59) the body will get a different setpoint to which it adjusts itself, so that I naturally gained some weight, which I did not mind by the way and was also beautiful.

But now I realize that the metabolism may be a bit lower as you get older and the body therefore needs less food.

It is quite another thing to eat less because the body has more energy left then, than to eat less to lose weight, which I have done in the past during my eating disorders.

It is a delicate balance, because if I eat too little I have little energy in another way.

It is nice to experience what is the right amount of food that makes my body feel comfortable.

***

The eating disorder is a temporary friend

The eating disorder is ultimately not an enemy. It is a support for this moment when there are no other ways available to deal with current problems.

The food refusal numbs painful emotions, and the binge eating also has the effect of anaesthesia.

It's important to think of the eating disorder as a temporary friend, even if you suffer from it. And to appreciate that friend for all that he has given you:

~ That could be a goal to live towards today: saving calories or looking forward to the moment of the binge, when you can focus on that alone for a while.

~ It could be suppressing emotions that are too troublesome at the moment, as I mentioned.

~ It could also be that the eating disorder is something that is only yours, hidden from the rest of the world; something that makes you feel like you, even if the downside is the painful daily struggle with food.

Writing a letter to the eating disorder can help. To write down everything that comes to mind. And then to change places and write back a letter from the side of the eating disorder. Often deeper layers emerge through writing.

From a family constellation perspective, the eating disorder often represents someone from your family system who has not been seen enough or has not received enough recognition.

You don't need to know who that person is. But if you can look at the eating problem like this: that it may not only be yours, but also represent someone who needs attention and recognition, the problem takes on a broader perspective.

Ultimately, the eating disorder is just a symptom. It's about what's underneath. Deep down it is the search for who you are deep down, and a search for giving meaning to your life. This quest is unique to every person.
 
***

Don’t fight the depression

Osho: “Remember this: Whenever you are depressed, wait for the moment that the depression goes. Nothing lasts forever; the depression will go. When the depression leaves you, wait – be aware and alert – because after the depression, after this night, there will be a dawn and the sun will rise. If you can be alert in that moment. you will he happy that you were depressed. You will be grateful that you were depressed because only through that depression, this possibility: only through that depression, this moment of happiness.

But what do we do? We move in an infinite regression We get depressed, and then we get depressed because of the depression: a second depression follows. If you are depressed, that′s okay, nothing is wrong in it. It is beautiful because through it you will learn and mature. But then you feel badly: "Why do I get depressed? I should not get depressed." Then you start fighting with the depression. The real depression is good, but the second depression is unreal - and this unreal depression will cloud your mind. You will miss the moment that would have followed the real depression.

When depressed, be depressed. Simply be depressed. Don′t get depressed about your depression. When depressed, simply be depressed. Don′t fight it, don′t create any diversion; don′t force it to go. Just allow it to happen, it will go by itself. Life is a flux; nothing remains. You are not needed; the river moves by itself, you are not to push it. If you are trying to push it, you are simply foolish. The river flows by itself - allow it to flow.

When there is depression, allow it to be. Don′t get depressed about it. If you want to remove it sooner, you will get depressed. If you fight it, you will create a secondary depression, which is dangerous. The first depression is beautiful, God-given. The second depression is your own. It is not God-given, it is mental. Then you will move in mental grooves - they are infinite.

If you get depressed, be happy that you are depressed and allow the depression to be. Then, suddenly the depression will disappear and there will be a breakthrough. There will be no clouds and the sky will be clear. For a single moment, heaven opens for you.

If you are not depressed about your depression you can contact, you can commune, you can enter this heavenly gate. And once you know it, you have learned one of the ultimate laws of life: life uses the opposite as a teacher, as a background.”

Osho - The New Alchemy: To Turn You On #8, The Silence That Follows the Storm

This is a fragment of my book: 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss'.

The link to this book is: https://amzn.to/3mD8xJ1

And the link tot he podcast about this book is: https://bit.ly/3lTsYkP

***

Go to the very bottom

Pamela Kribbe writes in her book 'Night of the Soul' about the deeper meaning of depression from the perspective of the soul:

"During this life and the many lives before you have experienced much pain and many disappointments, what can have created on the level of the soul a deep 'no' to life. Often you are not conscious of this. You have tried in many ways (in your work, in your family life, with friends) to seek distraction from this 'no' and from the deep despair and hopelessness that go along with it.

But the soul asks to face them and feel them until their roots. Only then a transformation can happen and can the negative feelings be turned into light and lifeforce.

In America 'hit the rock bottom' is a well known expression. Go to the bottom, to the deepest of the abyss, only then you can take of from there in the direction of life and positivity."

This is a fragment of my book: ‘Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss’.

The link to the book is: https://amzn.to/3mD8xJ1

And the link tot he podcast about this book is: https://bit.ly/3lTsYkP

***

Carrying the destiny of a family member

This is a fragment of my book: 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss':

“With family constellations - which has been developed by Bert Hellinger in the eighties - we see that depression is often part of something, that is much bigger than the one who has the depression.

The depression can develop for example because we carry out of love the destiny of someone of our family who did not want to live any more, for example because that person wanted to follow someone else in death, also because of love. That happens unconsciously.

When you start seeing such an entanglement in your family system, it is possible to come out of the identification with another family member.

When the family member you were identified with is recognized and honoured you feel harmony and you start feeling that from that moment onwards that person gives you strength and support. You are free now to live your own life and are not ruled any more by patterns that are not yours.”

De link naar het boek ‘Honger naar Vervulling’ is: https://bit.ly/3d7sx3F

En de link naar de podcast over dit boek is: http://bit.ly/3cYFjA3

***

Depression: a message of the soul

A fragment of my book: 'Depression, a Steppingstone towards Bliss':

"Psychiatry often not considers, that depression has to tell us something; that there is an underlying message: the message of our soul.
 
The soul invites us to face and to integrate our most repressed shadow sides in our lives, so that we can be complete and don't have hide anything for ourselves any more.”

The link to the book ‘Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss’ is: https://amzn.to/3mD8xJ1

And the link tot he podcast about this book is: https://bit.ly/3lTsYkP

***

The way to the light

A fragment of my book I am writing: 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss':

“In their book 'Spiritual Deepening' Fons Delnooz and Patricia Martinot describe how you have a choice each moment of the day, to move towards the light or towards darkness. "The light contributes to joy, love, light, strength, truth, honesty, purity and beauty. The darkness is that, which denies love".

The darkness has a much stronger pull on us. This is mostly because we are often raised by people (parents, teachers, grandparents, priests) who were in darkness themselves.

If we would be happy as a child, we would not belong to them anymore. Soon we discovered that we were more loved when we were sad or depressed, then when we were happy.

As a child you need the support of your parents. As an adult much courage is needed to withdraw from this pattern of being unhappy for the sake of somebody else. The courage to dare to stand alone and move towards the light.”

The link to the book ‘Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss’ is: https://amzn.to/3mD8xJ1

And the link tot he podcast about this book is: https://bit.ly/3lTsYkP

***

Depression; deep rest

Jeff Foster: “Depression: an invitation to rest deeply in the truth of who you are

We can view depression not as a mental illness, but on a deeper level as a profound and very misunderstood state of deep rest, which we enter when we are completely exhausted by the weight of our own false story of ourselves.

I will talk about depression in the deeper sense, about the deeper meaning of depression.

Often people are asking: how does depression relate to awakening? Is it possible to discover who I am in the midst of depression or do I have to get rid of my depression? Or is awakening some kind of cure for depression?

In the video of a few years ago I was speaking from personal experience what depression feels like. What it can feel like in its extreme form. You wake up in the morning and life just feels so heavy and it feels like you have to hold up this burden; life becomes this burden and it becomes so difficult, almost impossible, exhausting, holding up this burden. So what is the burden? The burden is the burden of me. That is what becomes so exhausting. And this is true probably for everyone, not just for people who are diagnosed with depression.

Everyone in the world is on some level trying to hold up some kind of image, some kind of story of himself, the story of my life, the story of my past, the story of my imagined future, the story of my successes and my failures and my hopes and my dreams, my plans. What can happen is that this story can just become so heavy.

So the experience of depression, extreme depression, clinical depression is that you wake up in the morning and everything just feels so heavy and it becomes such a struggle to live. Just getting out of bed in the morning becomes virtually impossible because it takes so much effort to hold up this story: this story of me and my life, the story of me. It feels you are weighted down by your story. It feels like you are being crushed by your story. You are literally pressed down, you are literally de-pressed, pressed down by your story.

But the thing is, this is really a wonderful invitation, that's what I would say. The invitation is contained within this experience, the experience of being depressed down by your story, the experience of being depressed by life, the experience of being crushed by the weight of you. It's a wonderful invitation really to discover awakening.

There is a truth to depression and this truth we often miss in our urge to quickly cure depression. Quickly: you are sad and quickly you make yourself happy or get back to work. Actually we can so quickly end up missing the deeper truth of depression, which is: this isn't your life to hold up; this story of me and my life. This isn't who you really are. This person, that you are pretending to be, this character that you are pretending to be, this facade that you are living in the world, it's not really who you are.

You have been pretending to be something that you are not. So this is going to crush you. Pretending to be something that you are not. Pretending to be this image. Pretending to be the-story-of-me is eventually going to become exhausting for everyone. And in the case of clinical depression it can even become totally exhausting and crushing.

But the point is that it is not about holding up your life in the first place. This story is not who you are. It's not who you really are. So that's the deeper truth of depression. If we can really listen to depression. Because what life is really saying is: "wake up, this is not really your life, this isn't really who you are. The story of you is not who you really are." So we could view depression not as a mental illness or some kind of sickness. It's not that there is something deeply wrong with you.

 And I want to say here, that lots of people have all kinds of theories about what depression is; it's a mental illness or it's a brain chemical disorder or it's genetic or it's in your DNA or whatever. And I don't want to say that anyone is wrong. I am just offering this perspective from my own experience, looking at depression in a deeper sense. So perhaps depression is not a sickness or an illness. Perhaps it's an invitation. I often speak of: life is a constant invitation to awaken or an invitation to discover who you really are. Which is not this separate, limited, constricted self. You are not the story of your life.

Who you are in this moment is not the image of you. Who you are in this moment is this wide open space. Some use the word awareness or consciousness. To me it doesn't really matter what words you use. I often speak about the ocean, the waves in the ocean. So who you really are is not the story of your life.

Who you are is this vast ocean, in which thoughts arise and dissolve, sensations arise and dissolve, feelings arise and dissolve. And who you are as the ocean doesn't come and go, doesn't arise and dissolve. Who you are as the ocean is always present. What you are is always present. So the waves may come and go, thoughts come and go, sensations come and go, feelings come and go, images, ideas, memories come and go. Even the most intimate ideas about yourself, judgements about yourself, come and go. None of these waves can truly define you, although they are deeply allowed in you. So who you are is vast and unlimited.

So really, depression is just an invitation. That's what I would say. Depression is this invitation to rediscover your unlimited, vast, boundless nature as awareness itself or as consciousness. Life is saying: "look, you are not who you think you are. This isn't your life. This life doen't fit you any more, if it ever did. You know, you are not this limited." In a way depression is a kind of loss of interest. Unconscious maybe at first. It's a loss of interest in being this story. It's a loss of interest in holding up the story of your life.

Viewing from one perspective that's a kind of pathological, because you are supposed to be interested in your life and you are supposed to want to be this person, you are supposed to know how your life is supposed to go and you are supposed to make your life work and you are supposed to be the one who is in charge of your life, you are supposed to be the one who is orchestrating your life.

What depression is inviting you to see is actually: maybe that's not true, maybe that's not true for you. Maybe who you are is this vast ocean. You know, you are not limited to these waves. You are not limited to thoughts, sensations, feelings. Who you are is this vast ocean. So depression is really just inviting you to rest in who you really are.

Stop pretending to be what you are not. Stop pretending to be this story. Stop pretending to be this false image, this inauthentic false image and wake up to who you really are and rest deeply in that.

So many people that I meet are so exhausted from life, so exhausted from the struggles, the seeking, struggling to find what they are looking for, struggling to hold up the image of themselves, the image of the successful businessman or businesswoman, the image of the mother, the father, the image of the one who knows, even the image of the spiritually enlightened one, pretending to be enlightened, pretending to be awakened, pretending to be anything. Pretending to be anything is going to become exhausting. That exhaustion is wonderful, it's not the enemy.

You know, the exhaustion is an invitation to stop; to stop pretending to be someone that you are not. Stop pretending to be someone that you are not.

And rest deep. That's really what I think to be the very core of depression: this invitation, this call to rest deeply in the truth of who you are.

And I love the word depressed. It sounds so much identical to deep rest. So: deep rest. A deep rest. So actually the core of depression is this invitation that is so easily missed when we rush to treat depression or cure depression or fix depression or fight depression. We think: we are down and we want to get up again. We are a down person and we want to become an up person. We are a sad person and we want to become a happy person. We are a failed person and we want to become a successful person.

So the invitation is actually to go beyond this duality of the person, the successful person or the failed person, the rich person and the poor person, the person who knows and the person who doesn't know. The truth of yourself comes before all of that.

What you are is not this one or that one, the successful one or the failed one, the happy one or the sad one. What you are is this vast, open space in which all these movements of life are included: success and failure, happiness and sadness, joy and pain, certainty and doubt. They are all allowed deeply to move in your life; all of life's energies are allowed to move in you.

In constructing the false self we start pushing away life's energies. We fall into this idea of opposites: good and bad, success and failure, rich and poor, happy and sad, certainty and doubt. And we reject what we call the negative aspects or the dark aspects. So we reject the doubt, we reject the fear, we reject the pain, we reject the failure. We reject all these aspects of life which we call negative and we seek the positive. But really, that's what becomes so exhausting. It's being at war with half of life.

So life is constantly calling us back and saying; look, I am everything. Life is everything. Just in the same way that the ocean arises in all of its waves, not just half of its waves. All of its waves are included.

So this is the call of depression, I would say. And I am not an expert on anything. I don't claim to be the one who knows. I don't have that image of myself. I don't claim to be anything. I would say this is an invitation to look more deeply.

And maybe just for a moment let go of all our prior assumptions and ideas of what depression is. Maybe depression is not the enemy. You know, it's calling to us. It's actually calling us to heal in a way. It's calling us to a deeper healing. It's just an invitation, as the whole of life is really. It's all just an invitation to remember this moment.

Forget about remembering tomorrow or whether or not you remember yesterday; that becomes irrelevant now. In this moment remember who you are now, which is this vast, open, spacious capacity for every thought, every sensation, every feeling. All of these waves. They are all welcome in you as the ocean. They are all welcome.

What you are is just the home for all of life. All of life comes to rest in you. Life was never about you trying to rest. It was never about you as a separate person coming to rest. That was always the dream. What you are ìs the home. What you are ìs already at rest. And all of life comes to rest in you; every thought, every sensation, every feeling comes to rest in you. So that's the deeper meaning of depression.

It's very different to what we are told. Maybe it's not common sense. But this understanding really completely changed my life and the lives of lots of people that I know. Just discovering this deep rest at the core of everything. And it's always present. It never leaves. It can't be destroyed. It's home. You know, it's home. It's what we were always looking for but we could never find. Because we were always looking for it out there in the world.

And I see and realize now, that years ago when I was going through this depression, it was all just a signpost, it was one giant signpost, a very painful signpost at that time but it was a signpost, it was an invitation, it was a calling to rest, because I didn't know how to rest. I never rested in my life. I didn't know how to rest. And I think that is true for a lot of people; we just don't know how to rest. We have never been told how to rest.

So many people that I meet are exhausted. But they are fighting their exhaustion. So what I am saying is that we just stop and listen to the exhaustion and we listen to the depression, as it softly whispers in our ear: "just rest child, just rest, you are exhausted, rest." And that's the deeper truth of life. It's this rest. And in the end we are all invited back to it, in many different ways, not always depression. But we are all invited back to this rest.

Jeff Foster: Youtube - Depression: Deep Rest

***

Outer conflict is inner conflict

The Japanese artist Meera Hashimoto says in the Art Therapist Training that I follow in 2015 words that help me a lot:

"What you judge in the other, you are yourself. If you really understand this, you can forgive others and yourself. The more you fight, the more you will be defeated. You end up in a suffering, which has no end. There is no end to darkness. We have to gather our consciousness. We cannot delay. If you delay, you create more fear, doubt, struggle, competition, jealousy. It is always you. So look at yourself in such a way; all arrows you put on others, put them back towards yourself.

Outer conflict is inner conflict. If you always look at things like this and direct everything inside, you can see yourself clearly."

***

The fear of intimacy

“Beloved Osho, I am a hit and run driver in my relationships with people. Could you speak about my fear of intimacy?”

Osho: “Rama Prem, everbody is afraid of intimacy.

It is another thing, whether you are aware of it or not. Intimacy means: exposing yourself before a stranger. We are all strangers. Nobody knows anybody. We are even strangers to ourselves, because we don't know who we are.

Intimacy brings you close to a stranger. You have to drop all your defenses, only then intimacy is possible. And the fear is, that if you drop your all defenses, all your masks, who knows what the stranger is going to do with you?

We are all hiding thousand and one things, not only for others but for ourselves. Because we have been brought up by a sick humanity. With all kinds of repressions, inhibitions, taboos, and the fear is for somebody who is a stranger. And it does not matter, you may have lived with the person thirty years, fourty years; the strangeness never disappears.

It feels safer to keep a little defense, a little distance, because somebody can take advantage of your weaknesses, of your fragilities, of your vulnerability.

Everybody is afraid of intimacy. The problem becomes more complicated, because everybody wants intimacy.

Everybody wants intimacy because otherwise you are alone in this universe. Without a friend, without a lover, without anybody you can trust, without anybody to whom you can open all your wounds.

And the wounds can not heal unless they are opened. The more you hide them, the more dangerous they become. They can become cancer in you.

Intimacy is an essential need on the one hand, so everybody longs for it. But he wants the other person to be intimate, so that the other person drops his defenses, becomes vulnerable, opens all his wounds to you, drops all his masks and false personality, stands naked as he is.

And on the other hand everybody is afraid of intimacy. The óther person you want to be intimate: you are not dropping your defenses. This is one of the conflicts between friends, between lovers, nobody wants to drop the defenses. And nobody wants to come in utter nudity and sincerity, open.

And both need intimacy.

Unless you drop all your repressions, inhibitions - which are the gifts of your religions, your cultures, your societies, your parents, your education - you will never be able to be intimate with someone.

And you will have to take the initiative.

But if you don't have any repressions, any inhibitions, you don't have any wounds either. If you have lived a simple, natural life, there will be no fear of intimacy, but tremendous joy of two flames, coming so close that they become almost one flame. This meeting is tremendously gratifying, satisfying, fulfilling.

But before you can attain intimacy, you have to clean your house completely. Only a man of meditation can allow intimacy to happen. He has nothing to hide. All that was making him afraid that somebody may know, he has dropped it himself. He has only a silence and a loving heart. You have to accept yourself in its totality. If you cannot accept yourself in your totality, how can you expect somebody else to accept you.”

Osho, The Hidden Splendor

***

The relation between you and your mother

Meera Hashimoto: “The relation between you and your mother is the foundation of your life. Drop the idea you carry since childhood about your parents. Accept that you are born out of imperfect parents. Perfection is dead and doesn't exist. If you reject your mother, you reject yourself. Can you say thank you? For that you got life? You can't pay off the life you got.

Can’t we drop the complaining attitude of the mind?

Enter into yourself. Watch yourself. Who are you that you don't love your mother? A story is just an excuse. The mind always wants to get what it did not get.

Reaching to your being is not a next step. This does not go in steps. Either you say 'yes' or you say 'no'.”

***

Bodyscan

The body scan is a good exercise to gain more awareness of the body. In the body scan, you are asked to lie down or sit with eyes closed and feel every part of the body from the inside. For example, how does your right big toe feel? Does it tingle? Can you feel the outline of it? Is it warm or cold? Does this toe touch the second one or not? In this way you scan your entire body. It is best to do this initially under the guidance of the therapist or with the help of a recorded text.

The body scan invites you to experience the body. Experiencing the many sensations of the body brings it to life and makes you more and more familiar with your body. You no longer have to run away from it and after a while you find peace in it and it becomes your home.

The body scan is not easy for me in the beginning during my eating disorder, because everything in me wants to go away from my body. I only see my body as something mechanical. To deal with it - I promised in the mindfulness course to do the scan every day - I rush it off - the same way I do everything in my life in a hurried way.

One day I get so fed up with this speediness that, before starting the body scan, I decide to do it very slowly this time and to take just one leg - instead of my whole body - to scan.

I find this slow pace scary - because it gives the sense of losing control - but it also gives me peace of mind; the feeling that I now have all the time in the world. I am moved to feel very tiny vibrations in a few muscles of my lower and upper leg. It feels like a delicate and vulnerable life and gives me a loving feeling towards my leg. I feel connected, really connected with the inside of my body. This is where I live. It is alive because it keeps changing every moment. It vibrates, flows, lives, is soft and is so unlike anything I could ever imagine. For the first time I experience what it is like to be alive without trying to control something.”

***

Twenty minutes for satiation

When you eat it takes twenty minutes before satiation hormones which are produced by your intestines, arrive at your brain. Especially when you eat protein and fiber, thes hormones are well produced.

Therefore, it is important to be alert during twenty minutes after eating, not to eat more than you need. You're still in the period then that the signal that you have eaten enough has not arrived at your brain.

When you have difficulty in stopping with eating, you can do two things: you can say out loud to yourself: "the meal is over now". And you can put ready a small task to do after eating, before you start eating. So you can be occupied with something else than eating after your meal for at least 20 minutes.

It helps to realize that after twenty minutes it will be a lot easier to withstand the urge to eat more.

***

The power of doing something new
 
Last night I slept on my balcony.

I heard the soft voices of people who enjoyed the summer night in the darkness in their garden. Then there was only the sound of the cicadas which was overruled in the middle of the night by the sharp gnawing of the snails, which were munching the leaves of my balcony plants. A mosquito buzzed musically around my mosquito net. The silhouettes of my plants were sharp against the moonlit sky and in the middle was a bright star.


I experienced the night intense. While it was passing unnoticed otherwise as I slept.

To this experience I link a fragment of my book: ' Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss':

The Power of doing something New

“During my depression, I buy one day, tired of doing every day the same, a salt & pepper set. The shape of the salt and pepper box is very funny. I come home with it and put it in my kitchen. It is all of a sudden, as if my whole house has changed by this new attribute. My whole house has a different, new radiation. That salt & pepper set was appealing to me. This is such a nice feeling that I sense I want to do something again that is new for me. I go to the Baker, because the delicious smell of fresh bread is flowing into the street that day. And I find a nice warm roll, that I have never eaten before. What a delicious taste! I feel rich inside because of this morning.

Very enthusiastic I tell this experience to my psychiatrist. But he looks away from me, with dull eyes, quickly grabs my file and goes over on another topic. By this I get the idea that it is not important for him. Big is my disappointment and because the connection with myself is so fragile, I let go of the idea of doing more things that are new for me. In retrospect, too bad I didn't trusted my own good feeling about this and made myself dependent on another to continue it.”

The link to the book ‘Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss’ is: https://amzn.to/3mD8xJ1

And the link tot he podcast about this book is: https://bit.ly/3lTsYkP

***

What is meditation?

"What is meditation? It is a technique, which can be practised? It is an effort, that you have to do? It is something, which the mind can achieve?"

Osho: “It is not. All that the mind can do, cannot be meditation--it is something beyond the mind, the mind is absolutely helpless there. The mind cannot penetrate meditation; where the mind ends, meditation begins. This has to be remembered, because in our life, whatsoever we do, we do through the mind. Whatever we achieve, we achieve through the mind.

And then, when we turn inwards, we again start thinking in terms of techniques, methods, doings. Because the whole of life's experience shows us, that everything can be done by the mind. Yes, except meditation everything can be done by the mind; everything is done by the mind, except meditation.

Because meditation is not an achievement--it is already the case, it's your nature. It has not to be achieved; it has only to be recognized, it has only to be remembered. It is there, waiting for you--just a turning in and it is available. You have been carrying it always and always.

Meditation is your intrinsic nature--it is you, it's your being, it has nothing to do with your doings. You cannot have it, you cannot not have it, it cannot be possessed. It's not a thing. It's yóu. It's your being.

Once you understand what meditation is, things become very clear. Otherwise you can go on groping in the dark.

Meditation is a state of clarity, not a state of the mind. Mind is confusion. Mind is never clear. It cannot be. Thoughts create clouds around you--they are subtle clouds.

A mist is created by them and the clarity is lost.

When thoughts disappear, when there are no more clouds around you, when you are in your simple being-ness, clarity happens. Then you can see to the very end of existence; then you can watch until the end of the existence; then your gaze becomes penetrating--to the very core of being.

Meditation is clarity, absolute clarity of seeing. You can't think about it. You have to drop thinking. When I say "you should drop thinking", don't rush to conclusions, because I need to use language. So I say: "drop thinking", but when you start dropping, you will miss, because again you reduce it to a 'doing'.

'Drop thinking' simply means: do nothing. Sit. Let thoughts settle themselves. Let mind drop on its own accord. You just sit gazing at the wall in a silent corner, not doing anything at all. Relaxed, loose, with no effort. Not going anywhere. As if you are falling asleep awake--you are awake and you are relaxing but the whole body is falling asleep. You remain alert inside but the whole body moves into deep relaxation.

Thoughts settle themselves of their own accord, you don't have to jump in between them, you don't have to to set them right. It is as if a river has become muddy ... what to do? Are you jumping in, trying to make the river clear? You will make it more muddy. You simply sit on the shore. You wait.

There is nothing that needs to be done. Because whatsoever you do, will make the river more muddy. When someone has been wading through the river and dead leaves have surfaced and the mud has come up, the only thing that is needed is patience. You simply sit on the shore. Watch, indifferently. And when the river moves on, the dead leaves will be taken away and the mud will start settling down because it cannot stay there forever. After a while you will suddenly notice: the river is crystal clear again.

Whenever a desire is passing in your mind, the river becomes muddy. So just sit. Do not try to do anything. In Japan, this ' just sitting ' is called Zazen; just sitting and doing nothing. And one day meditation happens.

Not that you can bring it to yourself; it comes to you. And when it comes, you recognize it immediately. It has always been there, but you didn't look in the right direction. The treasure was with you but you were busy somewhere else: in thoughts, in desires, in thousand and one things. You were not interested in the only thing ... and that was your own being.

When energy turns inside -- what Buddha calls 'parabvrutti': the returning of your energy to the source' -- then suddenly clarity has been achieved.

Then you can see the clouds thousands of miles away from you and you can hear the old music in the pines. Then everything is available for you.

Osho, Ancient Music in the Pines # 7

***

Problems cannot be solved by the ego

Osho: “The first thing to be understood is that any problem rooted in the ego cannot be solved without transcending the ego. You can postpone the problem, you can bring in a little normality, you can create a little normalness about it, you can dilute the problem but you cannot solve it. You can make a man function more efficiently in the society through psychonalysis, but psychoanalysis never solves a problem. It simply changes its place, but it remains there. A new eruption wil come sooner or later and when the new eruption of the old problem comes it wil become more difficult to postpone and shift it.

Psychoanalysis is a temporary relief, because psychoanalysis cannot conceive of anything which transcends the ego. A problem can be solved only when you can go beyond it. If you cannot go beyond it, then you are the problem. Then who is going to solve it? Then how is one going to solve it? Then you are the problem; the problem is not something separate from you.

Yoga, tantra and all the meditation techniques, they are based upon a different ground. They say that the problems are there, the problems are around you, but you are never the problem. You can transcend them; you can look at them like and observer is looking down from the hill into the valley. This witnessing self can solve the problem. Really, just by witnessing a problem is half solved already because when you witness a problem, when you can observe it impartially, when you are not involved in it, you can stand by the side and look at it. The very clarity that comes out of this witnessing gives you the clue, gives you the secret key. And almost all problems are there because there is no clarity through which to understand them. You do not need solutions: you need clarity.

A problem rightly understood is solved, because a problem arises through a non-understanding mind. You create the problem because you are not understanding. So the basic thing is not to solve the problem: the basic thing is to create more understanding. And if more understanding, more clarity is there, and the problem can be encountered impartially, observed as if it doesn't belong to you, as if it belongs to someone else; if you can create a distance between the problem and you - only then it can be solved.

Meditation creates a distance, it gives you a perspective. You go beyond the problem. The level of consciousness changes. Through psychoanalysis you remain on the same level. The level never changes; you are adjusted on the same level again. Your awareness, your consciousness, your witnessing capacity doesn't change. As you move in meditation you go higher and higher. You can look down at your problems. They are now in the valley and you have come to a hill. From this perspective, this height, all the problems look different. And the more the distance grows, the more you become capable of observing them as if they do not belong to you.

Remember one thing: if a problem doesn't belong to you, you can always give good advice on how to solve it. If it belongs to someone else, if someone else is in difficulty, you are always wise; you can give very good advice. But if the problem belongs to you, you simply do not know what to do. What has happened? The problem is the same but now you are involved in it. When it was someone else's problem, you had a distance from which to look at it impartially. Everyone is a good advisor for others but when it happens to oneself then all your wisdom is lost because the distance is lost.

So the whole technique of meditation consists of creating a distance between the problems and you.

Remember, a problem solved by someone else is not going to give you more maturity. You may become more immature. Then whenever there is a problem you will need some expert advice, some professional advice.

Freud said in the last days of his life that man is incurable. Man cannot be happy, Freud says. At the most we can arrange it so that he is not very much unhappy. What type of solution can come out of such an attitude?

But yoga says that man can be transcended. It is not man who is incurable; it is his minimal consciousness that creates the problem. Grow in consciousness, increase in consciousness and problems decrease.They exist in the same proportion: if there is a minimum of consciousness, there is a maximum of problems; if there is a maximum of consciousness, there is a minimum of problems. With total consciouness, problems simply disappear just like the sun rises in the morning and dewdrops disappear. With total consciousness there are no problems because with total consciousness problems cannot arise. At the most psychoanalysis can be a cure, but problems will go on arising; it is not preventive.

Yoga, meditation, goes to the very depth. It will change you so that problems cannot arise.

Psychoanalysis is concerned with problems; meditation is concerned with you directly. It is not concerned with problems at all.

Buddha has never tackled any problem because, says Buddha, problems are infinite. If you go on tackling every problem, you will never really be able to tackle them. Tackle the man himself. Just forget the problems. Tackle the being itself and help the being to grow. As the being grows, as it becomes more conscious, problems go on dropping; you need not be worried about them.

Remember well that you enjoy your problems; hence you create them.

A moment comes when you are so aware that problems do not arise. Meditation is not analysis. Meditation is growth. It is not concerned with problems; it is concerned with the being.”

Osho, The Supreme Doctrine # 17

***

Osho about active meditations

Osho: “The mental alone won't do: the body has to be brought in it.

That is why, in my meditation techniques, I do not take you as divided: you are one.

If your mind is feeling angry, allow your body to be angry. If your mind is feeling happy, allow your body to dance. Do not create a division. Let yourself come deep down into the body and allow the body to flow to your innermost core. Become a flow!

You are frozen. I would like to melt you and create a flow again.

That is why I insist on active meditation. By 'active' I only mean that your body must be involved in it.

If you simply sit in a Buddha posture, you can go on thinking and thinking and thinking; the body is not involved in it. And the body is the world. Through the body you are related to the existence, through the body you exist.

Your meditation must in some way be deeply rooted in the body; otherwise it will become just a dream floating in the mind, just like clouds without any roots in the earth. I want to push you back to the earth.”

***

You are responsible for your heaven and hell

Osho: “Purpose is human: you have purpose. But the existence cannot have any purpose. There is no sense in having any purpose. Existence is flowing - overflowing with its own energy. It is a festivity, not a purpose. It is a constant celebration. The existence is enjoying itself in so many forms. There is no purpose and existence is not worried if you are not reaching to ecstasy. It is only your worry. If you are not reaching, you will suffer. Existence is not suffering because of your not reaching and existence will not force you to move into ecstasy. It is up to you.

Existence is a deep freedom. If you want to be in suffering, be in suffering. If you want to be in bliss, be in bliss. It is your own choice. But it is too much for our minds to think that everything is our choice, because then we become responsible. If you come to think that you are the cause of your suffering, then you will feel very bad. It always feels better to make someone else the cause of your suffering.

But remember, if someone else is the cause of your suffering, you can never become free. Then there is no liberation. But if you are the cause of your suffering, then liberation is within your hands; you can do something and change it.

I tell you, you are the cause of your heaven and of your hell. If you are in hell, you have chosen it to be so. And the moment you decide, you can come out of it. No one is going to prevent you; no one will say to you: "Do not go." The gates are not closed against you. Really, there are no gates and no devil is standing at the door. You need not even have a passport to move out. It is simply your decision to be there.

You are suffering because you have decided to be in suffering; you can come out of it the moment you decide to come out. You can be in bliss if you decide to be in bliss. Your decision is your being. You choose whatsoever you are. You have chosen to be so; that is why it is so. Do not go on throwing responsibilities on something else - on nature, on God, on faith, on destiny. Do not go on throwing them.

But if you really feel that you cannot do anything, that you are helpless, then I say throw the total responsibility.

These are two ways:

* Throw the total responsibility; then you have nothing to do and everything will happen, because the moment you throw the total responsibility, the ego is also thrown, the ego cannot exist. If you give total responsibility to nature or to the divine force or to x y z, your ego is no more there. And when the ego is not, the thing happens.

* Or, if you cannot throw total responsibility, if you cannot surrender totally, if you cannot feel that you are totally helpless - remember the word total - then you will have to do something to dissolve the ego; then effort will be needed. Do either this or that but do not move in between. And do not try to travel in two boats. You will be in difficulty; you will never reach anywhere. (...)

Be either totally with destiny, with the divine force, and then you are no more; or be totally with a technique, with a method, so that the ego can be destroyed by and by, slowly. Method is a slow thing; surrender is total and final. Surrender is possible in a single moment; method will take time.

I am giving you method because I know that you cannot surrender.”

Osho, The Supreme Doctrine # 9

***

Balancing yourself
 
How do you balance yourself when having strong emotions?

* feel in your body where your emotion is located and feel how it feels in your body. Spread that feeling over your whole body, then it becomes less concentrated.

* go with your attention to a place in your body, where you feel quiet and relaxed.

* think of a place or activity, which gives you a nice feeling and feel what changes then in your body.

* start moving your body in slow-motion: move very slowly.

***

Love yourself
 
I share these words from the Indian mystic Osho:

“You will feel the most significant experience, you will become ecstatic if you can feel that the whole existence needs you, that you will be missed, that if you are not here there will be a gap, you will be missed. You are not unnecessary, you are not superfluous; you have tremendous significance.
 
Hence, love yourself. You are needed as much as the trees, as the flowers, as the birds, as the sun, as the moon, as the stars. You have to be here and you have a right to be the way you are.”

***

Hopes are bound to be shattered

Osho: “Hopes are bound to be shattered. To hope is to hanker for hopelessness, to desire is to breed frustration. But in the worldly things at least there is a possibility of succeeding, failing, attaining, not attaining. But in spiritual matters there is no question of attainment at all because the goose is out! Nothing can be done about it, it is already out. The moment you start enjoying your valley you are on the peak. There is no other peak.

One day I suddenly decided enough is enough. I dropped the idea of the peaks and started enjoying the valley, and a miracle I saw - the valley disappeared. In fact, from the very beginning there had been no valley, I was always on the peak, but because I was searching for a peak I could not see where I was.”

Osho - The Goose is Out #3

***
Emotion is the mind

Meera Hashimoto:

“When we have an emotion, we are clouding ourselves. With emotion you cannot convince people.

The nature of emotion in relationship is reaction.

Emotion is the mind. When you are in the mind, there is no meeting
 
When you are emotional, the other will also be emotional.

We have to learn to be in another space; coming back to the body, heart, meditation.

Emotion is not a bridge to connect with people.

The only connection is the space of meditation.”

***

Balance between giving and receiving

From the perspective of family constellations

Between partners the balance 'giving and receiving' has to be in an equilibrium. Because, when you give too much, finally your partner, who receives more, will leave you. Giving too much is a kind of humiliation of the other. The other comes in a position of debt and nobody wants this.

But there is something like 'a little more':

If you love someone and your beloved gives you something nice, you return him or her a little more of which is nice. In this way a positive spiral is created.

If someone you love, gives you something negative, you return something negative, but a little less. If you return the same or even more negativity, then the other will take revenge and you both come in a negative spiral.

If your beloved does something negative you and don't do anything or you even give him or her something positive, then there is no balance. And then you humiliate the other. Like: I am better than you.

***

Rejection of the parents causes depression

Gabrielle Hövel: “You said earlier that a man punishes himself in therapy if he screams or beats out his anger to his parents. What do you mean with this self punishment? How does this show itself?”

Bert Hellinger: "Somebody becomes depressed for example."

Gabrielle Hövel: “If he wasn't already depressed. Surely there are many people who are unable to express their anger?”

Bert Hellinger: "They don't become sick because they suppress their anger, but because they suppress the acting, that would lead to a solution. Only expressing the anger has never liberated anyone. You should always still act in a way which is in line with it. You said "if he wasn't already depressed '.

As a rule someone is only depressed if he has not taken his parents. If he expresses his anger once again in the manner described above, he pushes away his parents once again. As a result, the depression can deepen itself. But many simply to punish themselves by failing, for example in the job or in their work, or by losing their jobs or not finding a job, or in their relationship because they lose their partner or by losing a lot of money. "

Gabrielle Hövel: “But that doesn't mean - does it? - that everyone who's ever followed such a form of therapy, fails?”

Bert Hellinger: "It depends on the extent and severity of the situation. The basis for a happy development is honouring the parents and respecting what it means to be a parent and to pass on life. In this it doesn't matter how the parents are. Who presumes to despise his parents, will create himself in his life what he despised. Exactly by despising he becomes equal to his parents. Who honours his parents and takes them completely, takes all the good of them. It flows so to speak into him. The strange thing is attached to the parents due to a heavy destiny or weaknesses, stays with the parents then, and is not taken over. “

Gabrielle Hövel: “There is a book title of Nancy Friday: 'My mother/My self'. In this book she gives a very graphic description of what many know from daily practice. Suddenly they see themselves in the mirror as their mother. Or in everyday things they notice that they do exactly what they always had wanted to do differently, from a kind of urge to repeat.”

Bert Hellinger: "Yes, the more someone rejects his parents, the more he imitates them. If he rejects one of them - for example, because the father is alcoholic or the mother has a child out of wedlock - then the look is to that which is rejected. Then the good what the parents have given can no longer be seen and be taken. In this rejection someone also takes along the other aspects of life too then. No wonder that he feels empty and has a depressed personality."

Gabrielle Hövel: “He can't take what he was offered?”

Bert Hellinger: "Exactly. A special way of rejection of the parents is to make a claim on them. If someone makes a claim on how his parents should be or what they should still be doing for him, then he prevents himself to take from them what is essential. "

From the book: 'Anerkennen, was ist', Bert Hellinger talking with Gabrielle Hövel

***

Depression and Creativity

Article, written by me, in magazine the Optimist, July-Aug 2019

The word creativity hurts during my depression. I think this is true for most who are in this gritty, deadly state of mind. When I see other people develop new things and their eyes shine, I shut myself off because it's too confrontational. I am jealous and suffer from the lack of drive to do something.

Vocation

When I am eleven years old, my mother tells me that everyone gets a calling in their life.

From then on I prick up my ears to hear that calling. On the way to school, I keep my head tilted upwards, listening for a voice somewhere from the air that will reveal my life's mission. But that does not happen.

Years later, when a Lithuanian woman in the French eco-community Taizé tells me about the Osho Meditation Center in Pune (India), a powerful ball of energy springs from my upper abdomen. It is something that is completely beyond my understanding. Where I have always broken my head about what to do with my life, suddenly there is one knowing: I have to be there. I quit my job and leave for Pune for a year.

Only much later do I realize that the ball of energy I have felt in my stomach has been touching my creativity, waking up my calling. In the meditation center I come into contact with the healing and life-giving meditations of Osho, which I now facilitate with great enthusiasm.

Brake on the limbic system

In depression you have completely lost connection with the oldest part of your brain: the limbic system, in which the feelings and emotions are located and from which the motivation to engage in that which gives you satisfaction arises. This system is in close contact with the body.

Everything that activates or moves the body (sports, body-oriented therapy, acupuncture, tai chi, qi gong, yoga) brings the limbic brain to life.

When you are depressed you have blocked all movement, both mental and physical. The handbrake that you unconsciously tighten, keeps the emotional brain trapped in a far too narrow straitjacket and makes the emotional connection with yourself and your environment impossible. Everything is gray, flat and gray, without any view of creativity. There is a reason for maintaining this brake. The soul unconsciously stops you, urging you to encounter the deepest and darkest negative sides in yourself and to transform them into light. Deep down you can no longer unite with your old way of life and you long for a new way of being.

My spiritual teacher Osho, an Eastern mystic, calls depression a sign of intelligence: you no longer want to move with the masses, which move neurotically towards ambitions, the latest fashion, the most beautiful holiday destinations and a successful life, acting according to the prevailing norms and values. But you lack courage to struggle out of the old patterns.

Although it is hell to be depressed, this situation also gives you something. When you get stuck in the old, it gives you the reassurance that you still belong to your environment. You are loyal to your family members and show solidarity with the suffering they experience. In addition, you remain safe from those around you who are threatened if you are happy, because your happiness may make them feel that their lives are not flowing.

The connection with your mother

There is another very important factor that keeps you in depression and keeps you from creativity. I discovered this through the healing process family constellations, about which you can find more information on my website.

You are in the void of depression because you have not taken one of your parents (or both parents).

You receive life through your parents. When you are cut off from them, you cannot receive this life force and you are left empty. When it comes to creativity, the connection with your mother is essential. No one has made this as clear to me as the Japanese artist Meera Hashimoto, who developed the Osho Art Therapy (www.meera.de).

Our mother is our source of life. She carried us in her body and brought us to earth. Then she fed, clothed us and - if possible - loved us. Sometimes it was difficult for her to love because of entanglements in her life. But she gave us the greatest gift: life.

In addition, our mother is also a source of frustration. We experience our deepest pain because of her when the longing for her proximity is not fulfilled. When she leaves us, if only to do her own thing, it is unbearable. We bite into what we have not received in the hope of receiving it, in which we see everything that happens later in contact with our mother in relation to the pain that has been acquired earlier. We shut ourselves off to protect ourselves from another rejection.

What does it mean if the child does not ‘take’ the mother? The pain may no longer be felt, but receiving life through the mother has now also become impossible. This creates a vicious circle: for the mother, the rejection of the child is so painful that she can no longer give and the child will therefore shut itself off even more.

Not 'taking' the mother can also arise when you started taking care of your mother as a child; emotionally if your mother is suffering psychologically or physically if your mother is sick. That worry often makes you feel very powerful and important, and in fact it gives you strength. But it also means that you are no longer a child and that you cannot receive from your mother. You will then be left empty. This is the void of the depression. From this emptiness, creativity is impossible.

What is needed to get out of the depression is to establish a healthy connection with your mother and to regain the position of your mother's child: you are small and she is big. You accept her as she is; you take her completely as a mother with all her limitations and without wanting to change her. She gave the best she can give you in her situation and with the possibilities she has.

As a child you do not have the right to make any claim to her in the sense of wanting more or to ask her to be different. A healthy relationship with your mother is being able to thank her for giving you life at the risk of her own life, because pregnancy and childbirth are not without danger to life. It is respecting her fate and deciding to receive everything you did not receive from her from other people; a little bit from a lot of people.

In the book 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss' I describe how I started to take care of my mother emotionally, because she was in the Japanese concentration camp and experienced so much terrible things there. I wanted to take my mother's pain away. However, if you want to take away your mother's fate, you are depriving her of the strength and dignity that fate gives her.

The moment I saw in a family constellation how much strength the Japanese camp gave my mother, I could see her as strong and big and I became her child again. At the same time I received everything from her that she has ever given me. I left the burden that came with her. This allowed me to turn around and go my own way, with the support of my mother in my back.

It made no difference that she had died twenty-seven years earlier. At that moment the creativity ignited in me.

Taking my child's position back was not just easy; I had to give up my ego, in which I had invested a lot by constantly looking after her. When I let go of this it seemed at first as if I had nothing left; I ended up in a vacuum. But when I cleared this void there was a lot to replace it: I made a new start with my company Joy in Meditation from where I offer Osho Meditations, the Japanese Therapeutic Facial Massage and Family Constellations.

Creativity

I now dance life, still become more skilled in family constellations, enjoy nature, share my joie de vivre with my friends and accompany people with depression.

Having experienced the transition from the grayness of the depression to the light you experience when you come out of it, creates a fountain of creativity.

Many artists have had depressive periods. Their creation testifies to the depth they have acquired in struggling through their darkness. They express a span that extends from the deepest valley to the highest peak. The color of their music, paintings, dance and writing is clearly visible because it contrasts with the gray background of the depression.

For forty years I have been looking for ways to get out of my depression and three years ago I found it. My gratitude for this is so great that I shared my experiences in the book: 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss'. In this book I describe how you can get out of depression with consciousness and without medicines and regain your creativity.

Concluding words of the book 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss'

When I was depressed, I looked everywhere to find a book about how to get out of depression with consciousness; a book in which meditation would play an important role. I have now written the book I was looking for.

I know how difficult it is to move from the frozen state of the depression. And how important it is to be recognized and accepted in the darkness in which you find yourself. That darkness has value; it forms the bottom from which the light can emerge.

What now?

The guidelines described in the various chapters can all lead to the start of your lifestream.

It may be that one chapter appeals to you and the other does not at all.

My invitation is if something from this book appealed to you, to build it into your day and make it a commitment to yourself.

The depression has often been months or years of practice in negative thinking, little exercise, little contact with yourself and others and denial of your body. This means that it takes months or years of practice to (again) take a life-giving path. I have experienced that when I said 'yes' to that, the practice became so precious to me that - even now I feel happy again - I don't want to stop.

It has been very supportive for me to write down every day in the diary every night before going to bed. That prevents you from giving too much weight one thing of the day. The way of writing is also important. In depression, you are often used to telling your life story in a negative way. However, when you start writing in a way that gives meaning to everything you have experienced, it triggers a flow of 'meaning to your life'. Even the feeling of pain can be meaningful if you describe it as, "I have dared to feel the pain now and it can heal."

If you want to get started with the guidelines in this book, you may also encounter skepticism in yourself or in people around you.

The mind is always full of judgments and is often afraid of change or opening up to something new. It is our choice to either listen to that mind or take up the challenge of experimenting with new things. I've found that even a negative experience is better than maintaining a 'same thing every day' routine.

Maybe you don't dare to give up the antidepressants yet, you don't believe in reincarnation, you are afraid that meditation is something not grounded at all, you don't want to miss the coffee with a lot of sugar, you find family constellations a far-from-my-bed show and you hate contact with others because you feel that everyone is abandoning you.

Yet there has been something in you that has picked up this book. That may be the hand of your heart, of your inner child or of your soul. I think many people who are depressed follow their soul's invitation, to freeze everything in their lives for a while, in order to find that which is pure and true.

Each chapter contains a key that fits on a door that can be an entrance to bliss. When you go through that door, you may first encounter a lot of pain; pain that still wants to be felt. If you dare to do this and then do not give up, the same pain will refine you. I say that from my own experience.

Never think that bliss is not for you; it's your birthright.

The layers that cover bliss are a bit thicker in some people than in others. But the thicker the layer that you go through, the greater the bliss you wait.

I wish you a good journey to the source of your life.

***

Vain search for connection

I share a beautiful text from Franz Ruppert from a book of him about family constellations: 'Ein Unternehmen der Verlagsgruppe Random House'

Search for connection in vain

"Symptoms that we encounter in a depression are hopelessness, aimlessness, loss of meaning, loss of motivation, depressed mood, strong guilt- and shame feelings, repressed anger, physical complaints, sleep problems, eating problems, and so on.

The only cause for this is in my opinion the futile effort of the soul to bond.

Every time the soul is looking for connection and love and can't find both of them, it is very painful for her. She pulls back after a while and gives up her attempts to bond, to feel the pain no longer. She becomes passive. She becomes anxious. She becomes helpless. Everything seems meaningless. From the outside this is visible in the behavior of a man as being depressed and hopelessness.

This situation applies, for example, for small children who are looking for bonding with the soul of their mother or father. Bert Hellinger has introduced the concept of 'unterbrochene Hinbewegung ' (interrupted movement in the direction of a loved person) in order to make visible that the development of the soul of this man has remained standing still at the attempt to reach out in particular to the mother.

At a very early stage in the development of the identity, the child doesn't succeed in bonding itself to the soul of his mother. It remains isolated and the basic emotions of this part of the identity are resignation and apathy. The personality which develops from there knows no hope to free itself from this isolation of the soul."

***
Depression and having banned one of the parents

Bert Hellinger (founder of family constellation) about Depression:

I have discovered something about true perfection

It starts with becoming right with yourself. That is the first thing.

Many are torn apart inside, they are not satisfied with themselves. If you examine it, you can see that they have banned one of their parents from their heart, or even both of them. Then they are cut off from the source of their life.

When someone is cut off from one of his parents, he has only half life force and when someone has only half life force, he becomes depressed.

Depression is a feeling of emptiness, not of sadness. Having a feeling of emptiness means, that one of the parents is missing. Then the heart is only half filled. The depression disappears and someone becomes right with himself, if he pays respect to both parents and loves them. If this succeeds, it will be experienced as grace.

This I can not just intend as if I could manage it. If it succeeds, it is experienced as a gift. Then the basic feeling becomes lighter and more fulfilled and the depression is over.

***

Accepting Depression

Osho: "Feel the depression, taste it deeply, live it. It is your fate. Then suddenly you will feel it has disappeared because the man who can accept even depression cannot be depressed. A man, a mind, who can accept even depression, cannot remain depressed. Depression needs a non-accepting mind. "This is not good, that is not good; this should not be, that should not be; this must not be like this." Everything is denied, rejected - not accepted. "No" is basic. Even happiness will be rejected by such a mind. Such a mind will find something to reject in happiness also.

A non-accepting mind will 'non-accept' anything, but if you can accept your loneliness, your depression, your sadness, you are transcendig already. Acceptance is transcendence. You have taken the very ground away, and then the depression cannot stand there.

Try this: Whatsoever your state of mind, accept it and wait for when the state changes itself. You are not changing it; you can feel the beauty that comes when states change by themselves. You can know that it is just like the sun rising in the morning and then setting in the evening. Then again it will rise and again it will set, and it will go on. You need not do anything about it.

If you can feel your states of mind changing by themselves, you can remain indifferent, you can remain away, miles away, as if the mind is going somewhere else. The sun is rising, setting; the depression is coming, the happiness is coming, going; but you are not in it. It goes and comes by itself; the states come and move.

Nothing is permanent; life is a flux. Heraclitus has said that you cannot step twice in the same river. It is impossible to step twice in the same river because the river has flowed on; everything has changed. And not only has the river flowed on, you also have flowed on. You are also different; you are also a river flowing.

See this impermanency of everything. Don't be in a hurry; don't try to do anything. Just wait. Wait in a total non-doing. And if you can wait, the transformation will be there. This very waiting is a transformation."

Osho, the Book of Secrets #38

***

Night of the Soul

A piece of my book: 'Depression, a Steppingstone towards Bliss':

Pamela Kribbe describes in her book 'Dark Night of the Soul' the deeper meaning of depression from the perspective of the soul: "During this life and many lives before you have experienced a lot of pain and disappointment, what may have created a deep 'no' to life at soul level. Often you are not conscious of this. You have tried in many ways (in your work, in your family life, with friends) to seek distraction from this 'no' and from the deep despair and hopelessness that goes with it.

The soul, however, asks to face these deeply hidden feelings. To look at them and to feel them in the roots.

Only then a transformation can happen and the negative feelings can be turned into light and life force.

In America, 'hit rockbottom' is a familiar expression. Go to the bottom, to the deepest of the abyss, only then you can turn from there in the direction of life and positivity."

This is the link to my book 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss': https://amzn.to/3mD8xJ1

***

Agony & Ecstacy

The following text by Osho was given to me by the Japanese artist Meera Hashimoto and has been of great support in my life. That's why I have written down Osho's spoken words to be able to share them with you.

Osho: “You exist first, and then you have to find who are you? The animals, the trees, the rocks know first who are they, then they exist. Hence there is no spiritual inquiry; no animal bothers asking the question ‘Who am I, what is the meaning of my life?’ He knows it already, there is no question, there is no doubt, no inquiry.

Man is continuous inquiry, a continuous question. To the very last breath he goes on growing. To the very last breath he can change his whole life pattern; he can take a quantum jump. There is no necessity for him to go on following the path he has followed. At the very last moment he simply can step aside. There is nobody to prevent him, it is his freedom.

Man is the only animal in existence who has freedom. And out of this freedom is agony. Agony means: I don’t know who am I. I don’t know where I going and why I am going. I don’t know whatever I am doing, whether I am supposed to do it or not. The question continuously remains. Not even for a single moment the question leaves. Whatever you do, the question is there, that: are you sure? Is it the thing for you to do? Is this the place for you to be? The question leaves not even for a single moment.

And this is as deep as deep anything can be in you. At the very core of your being. This is the agony, that the meaning is not known, that the purpose is not known, that the goal is not known. It seems as if we are accidental. That by some accident we are born. No other animal, no other tree, no other bird is accidental. They are planned. Existence has a whole program for them. Man seems to be totally different. Existence has left man utterly free.

Once you become aware of this situation, then agony arises. And it is fortunate to feel it. That is as I say it is not ordinary pain, suffering, misery; it is a very extraordinary and of tremendous value to your whole life, its growth, that you should feel agony. That your each fibre of being should feel the questioning. That you should simply become a question.

And naturally it is frightening. You are left in a chaos. But out of this very chaos the stars are born. If you don’t start stuffing out of fear, if you don’t start escaping from your agony; everybody is trying to escape: finding ways: falling in love, doing this, doing that, somehow, somewhere engaged. One thing is not finished and you start doing another thing. Because you are afraid, if between the two there is a gap, and the question arises its head, and you start feeling agony, it is better continue, go on running, don’t stop. People start running from their birth till they die. They don’t stop, they don’t sit by the side of the road under a tree.

To me the statues of Buddha and Mahavira in the East, sitting in a lotus posture under a tree does not mean anything historical. They mean something far more significant. These are the people who have stopped running. These are the people who have stepped out of the road on which the whole procession of humanity is going on. (…)

Agony is the experience that you have come into the world a clean slate, tabula rasa. Nothing is written on it. This is your original face.

Now you can do two things: one is: being afraid of this vacuum, you can start running after something or other, earning money, power, learning, asceticism, becoming a sage, scholar, politician, somehow to give you a feeling of identity. Somehow, to hide your own inner chaos. But whatever you do, the chaos is there and is going to remain there. It is an intrinsic part of you. So those who understand don’t try in any way to escape from it. On the contrary, they try to enter into it.

These are the two ways: either run away from it as everybody else is doing, or run into it. Reach to its very centre… howsoever painful, fearful. But reach to the centre, because that is you, and it is good to be at least one time at the very exact centre of your being.

The moment you reach that centre, then the second word becomes significant: ecstasy. Ecstasy is the flower out of agony. Agony is not against ecstasy. Agony is the way to ecstasy. Just you have to accept it. What else one can do? It is there. You can close your eyes, that does not mean that the sun has disappeared; it is still there.

And everybody is trying to close his eyes. The sun is too glaring. Close your eyes, completely close your eyes, forget about it, don’t look at it, as if it is not there. Believe that it is not there. These pseudo religions are trying to teach you exactly that. Try to reach to God, try to reach to heaven, follow Jesus Christ. But none of them says: ‘Don’t follow anybody and don’t look for any paradise or heaven’, because this is all trying to deceive yourself.

Encounter yourself, face yourself. Have a one hundred and eighty degree turn. Look into the chaos that is there, into the agony that is there. And if it is your nature, then howsoever painful it is, we have to be acquainted with it. And the miracle is: it is painful to pass through it, but it just the greatest bliss when you have passed and reached the centre of your being.

Agony is all around the centre. And the ecstasy is just in the centre. Perhaps agony is just a protective shell. Ecstasy is so valuable: it needs protection. And nature has created such a protective wall. (…) The moment you think of it, it seems to be a tremendous gift of nature. It changes its whole colour, its fragrance, its meaning. It is a protective wall. (…)

Don’t run away from yourself. Whatever the case may be, a man’s metal is judged by entering into his own inner chaos. You are worthy to call yourself human beings only, when you have reached to the centre. And you can see from the centre around yourself. You áre blissful. Not only that you are blissful, from the centre the whole existence is blissful too. Agony and ecstasy are two sides of your being. They both make you one organic unity, one whole.

So I am not telling you how to get rid of agony. That is what pseudo religions have been telling you for centuries. I am telling you how to befriend agony, how to be in love with the chaos. Once you are in love with the chaos, the freedom that chaos brings, the unbounded space that the chaos brings…enter into it, till you reach the centre.

To find oneself is to find all. Then there is nothing missing. Then there is no question left. Then for the first time you have the answer, although you cannot convey the answer to anybody else. But you can convey the way how you found it.

That’s what the function of a master is. He does not give you the answer, he does not make your more knowledgeable. He simply shows you the method, how he found himself. He encourages you to take a jump into your chaos, into your agony. The master is simply a proof, that don’t be afraid. If this man can find his centre, passing through all the agony, there is no reason why you cannot do it too.

And once you know the taste of ecstasy, your whole life for the first time has something that can be called godliness. A new quality arises in you, a new flair, a new flame. But that is our nature, everybody’s nature.

I have never tried in my life to become anybody. I have simply allowed life to take me wherever it wanted. One thing I can say to you: I have not been in a loss. It was a great joy to be taken over by nature. I have not at all interfered. I have not even been swimming, because in swimming you are at least throwing your hands. I have been just going with the stream, floating, wherever the stream is going.

Fortunately all streams reach finally into the ocean – the small, the big, somehow or other they all find their way to the oceanic and the oceanic feeling I call the religious feeling; when your small drop drops into the ocean. In one sense you are no more, in one sense you are for the first time. On one hand there is death and on the other hand there is rebirth.”

***

My fall

My early morning meditation on the balcony has ended and so has my breakfast on the balcony. I love to feel the crisp cold, see the light awaken and hear the jubilant sound of the birds.

Before I go inside to work on my next newsletter, I jump for joy and slip on the smooth wooden balcony tile. With a huge thud, I slam my right ribcage sideways on the sharp threshold of my balcony.

I scream in pain and think all my ribs are broken. That is not true. I can still move and I'm trying to breathe. It's painful but it still works… My body is in shock and at the same time so happy to be alive. I cry, scream, pity continuously for three quarters of an hour, very loud. A survival instinct in me pushes me to keep expressing myself. Screaming, crying deeply…

With this I cry and scream out not only my pain, but also all the tensions that have been between me and my upstairs neighbour.

Then I continue making noises for another 15 minutes. The sounds of pain and terror keep my body from freezing. Then I remember that after this I can also make healing sounds. Now I use the sounds to send healing energy to my badly bruised ribs and muscles. It's a low-pitched sound that knows exactly where to go. It heals me from within.

I give my body the space to tremble, so that trauma cannot settle in my body. And then let my sisters know what has happened to me; they are so loving to me. I talk short, because I can't talk for long because every breath is painful.

I feel closer to my body than ever, and gentle on myself. I see the orangey sky of the morning sun and the birds that sit in the tree give me support. One of my sisters gets me internal arnica (traumeel). I have already applied the external trauma.

If I sit very still in my chair I can work, and I hardly feel any pain. But every move I make causes pain. That contributes to my consciousness. I learn how to lower my legs when I want to bend. How to get out of bed by arching my back and leaning on my elbows (one of which is injured too) and then slowly push up, then slide forward, lift my legs out of bed and then use the muscle strength of my legs to rise.

I know this is going to take months, but I feel it brings me something. That existence is wiser than I am. That this is the right time for me. I feel connected to everyone who is in pain, everyone who has limitations. And also consider me so lucky that my body has been strong enough to take this huge blow without breaking anything, and that I have work that I can do while sitting.

I consider myself lucky that I can see, hear, feel, smell, and that I can still breathe!

How much everything can change in a moment, and in fact it always does. But something so painful shakes me awake.

It was nice to have expressed my feelings in such a pure way, without even thinking for a moment what others will think… My body took over, my nature, my life…

What happened to me is exactly what my podcast 'From Pain to Being' is about.

The podcast can be listened to via Spotify, Apple Podcast, Google Podcast, Stitcher and Podbean.

***

Stop trying to heal yourself

Jeff Foster: “Stop trying to heal yourself, fix yourself.

Stop trying to fast-forward the movie of your life, chasing futures that never seem to arrive.

Instead, bow deeply to yourself as you actually are.

Your pain, your sorrow, your doubts, your deepest longings, your fearful thoughts, are not mistakes and they aren’t asking to be healed.

They are asking to be held.

Here, now, lightly, in the loving arms of present awareness.”

***

Zero point

Osho: "We have become accustomed to ups and downs. When we are up, we feel good, when we are down, we feel bad. But just in the middle is a point that is neither up nor down; that is the neutral point.

Sometimes the neutral point is very frightening, because if one feels bad one knows what the case is; if one feels good one knows what is the case. But when one cannot feel either, one is simply in a kind of limbo and one is afraid. But that point is very beautiful. If you can accept it, that point will give you immense insight into your life. When you are up, the up disturbs you; all pleasures bring fever, excitement. And when you are down, again you are disturbed in a negative way. When you are up, you want to cling to that state; when you are down you want to get out of it. Something is there to work on and to remain occupied with, but when you are just in the middle, all fever is gone; it is a zero point. 

Through that zero point one can have immense insight into oneself because all is silent. There is no happiness, there is no unhappiness, so there is no noise of any kind, there is utter quietness. Buddha used this point very deeply in his work with all his disciples. It was a must, everybody had to attain it first, and then the real work started. He calls it 'upeksha' - another name for neutrality."

***

Be natural

Osho: "Whatsoever happens naturally is good, and all shoulds are repressive. If you are feeling copping out, cop out. It will be wrong and you will be going against nature if you force yourself and remain in it.

Everyone should feel their own spontaneity. When you feel you want to withdraw, withdraw; when you want to be with someone, be. If you only want to half do something, only half do it. There is no urgency to complete it. There is nothing wrong in it. You have an idea that one should do things completely. That idea is creating the trouble. There is nothing wrong in it! You half do things - why be worried about it? That worry is your own creation. 

One should start loving oneself, accepting oneself, because there is no other way for you than to be yourself. Just accept, otherwise you will create misery.

All 'shoulds' are dangerous, and all ideals and perfectionist ideas are very dangerous. There is no need for them. Whatsoever you can do, do, and enjoy it. When you feel that you want to get out of it, simply get out - with no grudge, no grumble or guilt, so you remain clean and pure"

Osho, Hammer on the Rock # 28

***

Outrage

Bert Hellinger (founder of family constellations):

"When someone is outraged about something bad, they seem to be on the side of good and against evil, on the side of right and against wrong. They step in between the perpetrators and the victims in order to ward off further evil. But then again, they could also step between them with love, and certainly better than that.

So what does the outraged person want? And what are they really doing?

The outraged person behaves as if they were a victim without being one themselves. They claim for themselves the right to demand satisfaction from the perpetrators, without any injustice having been done to them.

They make themselves the victims' lawyer as if they had transferred the right to represent them unto them and then leave them without rights. And what does the outraged person do with this entitlement?

They take the liberty of doing harm to the perpetrators without the fear of serious personal consequences; for since their evil deeds appear in the light of good, they need not fear punishment.

In order that the outrage may remain justified, the outraged person dramatizes both the injustice suffered and the consequences of the guilt.

They intimidate the victims to see the injustice in the same terrible light as they do. Otherwise, they too become suspicious in the victim's eyes and must fear to become victims of their outrage themselves, as if they were perpetrators.

In the face of outrage, the victims can hardly leave their suffering behind and the perpetrators can hardly leave the consequences of their guilt behind.

If it were left to the victims and perpetrators themselves to seek balance and reconciliation, they could allow each other a new beginning. But this is difficult to do in the face of outrage, for outraged people are usually not satisfied until they have destroyed and humiliated the perpetrators, even if it makes the victims' suffering worse.

Outrage is first and foremost moral. In other words, it is not about helping someone, but about enforcing a claim as the executor of which the outraged person presents themselves and feels.

Therefore, unlike someone who loves, they know no pity and no moderation."

***

The art of helping - finding the right therapist

In this podcast episode (click this link to listen it) is about healthy and unhealthy ways of helping. What I say has really been an eye-opener for me. I highly recommend listening to this episode.

Content of the episode:

* What is the right attitude of helping? 

* The demeaning of being advised

* How the helper is in fact often the client

* * Unhealthy ways of helping arise from entanglements within the family system

* The correct helping of children by the parents ? &

* What is a healthy way of helping?

I wish you joy in listening.

***

Only sitting

Osho: “Zazen is a deep unoccupiedness - not doing anything outwardly, not doing anything inwardly. It is not even meditation because when you meditate you are making some sort of effort, you are trying to do something: chanting a mantra, remembering God, or even remembering yourself.

But these efforts create ripples, these efforts create vibrations and your sitting becomes corrupted. Then your sitting is not innocent. Zazen means: sit, and just sit, nothing else.”

I 'try' this every morning when I am sitting on my balcony at sunrise. I have put 'try' in quotation marks, because trying is already another effort. How hard it is to do nothing. How much I am trained to do and to work on something, to have a goal. How confronting it is that I can hardly let go of it. Only now and then there is a moment when there is nothing, and at the same time everything is so spacious. And the moment I realize it, it is also gone again, because then I 'try' to keep it, then I want to let go of trying again and therefore try something again...

Nevertheless, it is so valuable to stay seated morning after morning ... because it makes me feel something of who I really am, or am not...

***

Radiate love

Osho: “Sitting alone in your room, be loving. Radiate love. Fill the whole room with your love energy, as if you are in an ocean of love.

Create vibrations of love energy around you. And you will start feeling immediately that something is happening, something in your aura is changing, something around your body is changing. A warmth is arising around your body... a warmth like deep orgasm.

You are becoming more alive. Something like sleep is disappearing. Something like awareness is arising.”

***

Dealing with shit in the head

A seeker of the truth asks Osho about watching ‘a lot of shit going through his head and Osho replies:

"It is natural, so don’t feel in any way depressed by it. If you do, it is impossible to get rid of it because you lose all energy in it. People who become interested in meditation, sooner or later start feeling hopeless, because the chatter of the mind seems non-ending; it goes on and on, and the more you try to finish with it, the more it bubbles up. Don’t be in a hurry, and don’t take any negative attitude about it.

Even shit can be used; it can become good manure. So don’t be negative about it. We are going to use it. There is no better fertilizer than it, and when you see a rose flower coming, it is out of a fertilizer. Meditation arises out of the mind. It is no-mind but it is based in the mind. It is just like a lotus born out of mud, just ordinary mud.

And the second thing: don’t try to stop it. Be loose. Tell the mind to just go on and to finish its trip. Remain unconcerned, as if it is none of your business, as if it is just a traffic noise—and it is. It is an engine that goes on continuously from the time of your birth to your death. It goes on making noises, chattering, rehearsing, projecting, remembering the past, desiring the future. Accept it in aloofness.

By and by you will see that there arises a distance and the distance between you and the noise of the mind goes on becoming bigger and bigger and wider and wider. One day suddenly you realize that it is not there. There is a tremendous silence. For moments you will realize that everything stops, and then starts again, but you remain aloof. Remain aloof even to the stopping, because if you rejoice too much in it you are immediately distracted. The mind will come in again and the whole functioning will start. If it stops that is okay. If it starts again, that too is okay.

But this is how the distance is created—and this distance is meditation. As I see it, nothing is needed. Simply be unconcerned and watch. That word ‘watch’ is a little too positive—watchfulness plus aloofness. Then the danger of that positive watching is avoided—a passive watchfulness."

So if you too suffer from this affliction -like everyone does- simply try to do something a little different, as in watching your thoughts passively as if they don't belong to you."

***

Meditation and the smallness of death

In the last fifteen minutes of sitting on my balcony with my eyes closed, I am finally at a distance from the train to thoughts that have crossed my mind for the first forty-five minutes. Keeping my body motionless (except the few times I extend my legs) helps with that. 

I now hear the traffic whizzing past two blocks away. I hear the birds and the rustling of leaves in the wind. I feel the cold wind reaching my body, which is hidden under many layers of clothing. I hear the birds singing, each with a different sound.
There is a space inside of me. It feels like a space that is both within me and connected to the space of the universe around me. I no longer really feel my personality, but more of a space that is part of space.

And then I suddenly realize that all movements on the Earth will continue when I will have left my body. That all those movements will be just like now that I am still in my body.

I feel that death is essentially very small. That the only thing that changes is: no body instead of a body. But everything else is still there. That brings up a smile from within.

What I also realize is that the existence of death is important to feel the motivation to go in like a spear to get in touch with the essence of life.

***

Question to Osho: "I don't like myself, especially my body.”

Osho: “If you have a certain idea about how the body should be, you will be miserable. The body is as it should be. This is the body you have; this is the body that God has given to you. Use it, enjoy it. And if you start loving it, you will find it changing, because if a person loves his body, he starts taking care of it, and care encompasses everything.

If you care, then you don't stuff it with unnecessary food. If you care, then you don't starve it. You listen to your body's demands, you listen to its hints - what it wants, when it wants it.

When you care, when you love, you become attuned to your body, and your body automatically becomes okay. If you don't like your body, that will create a problem, because by and by you will become indifferent to your body and negligent of it because who cares about the enemy? You will not look at it; you will avoid it. You will stop listening to its messages, and then you will hate it more. But you are creating the whole problem.

The body never creates problems; it is the mind that creates problems. Now, this is an idea of the mind. No animal has a problem about his body image, no animal, not even the hippopotamus! They are perfectly happy because there is no mind to create any negative thoughts; otherwise the hippopotamus might think: "Why am I like this?" Animals have no such problems.

Just drop the ideal. Love your body - this is your body, this is a gift from God. You hae to enjoy it and you have to take care of it. When you take care, you exercise, you eat, and you sleep. You take every care because this is your instrument, just like your car, which you clean, which you listen to, listen to every hum, so you will know whether something is going wrong. You take care even if the body gets a scratch.

Just take care of the body and it will be perfectly beautiful - it is! It is such a beautiful mechanism, and it is so complex. It works so efficiently. It goes on for seventy years. Whether you are asleep or awake, aware or unaware, the body goes on functioning, and the functioning is so silent. Even without your caring it goes on functioning; it goes on doing service for you. One should be grateful to the body.

Just change your attitude and you will see that within six months your body has changed its form. It is almost like when you fall in love with a woman; you see that she immediately becomes beautiful. She may not have cared about her body up to this moment, but when a man falls in love with her, she starts taking care. She stands before the mirror for hours... because somebody loves her!

The same happens when you love your body; you will see that your body starts changing. It is loved, it is taken care of, it is needed. It is a very delicate mechanism - people use it very crudely, violently. Just change your attitude and see the difference.”

Osho, Body/Mind Balancing

***

One moment

Sometimes I open a computer program and a wheel begins to spin under which I find the words ‘one moment’. Or I have entered my debit card in the store, typed my code and then the words: ‘one moment’ appear.

I feel then that my body and mind want to rush on to the next action. As if that next action is much more important than this moment.

When I realize that I feel what a wonderful message these devices are sending. They are zen sticks from digital masters. And if the master in me joins in, then:

I stand still,
breathe deeply,
see the environment I am in,
feel my body
and a smile appears on my face

This moment ... a beautiful pearl

***

Healing psychosis with family constellations

As a medical doctor I can say that psychosis cannot be cured by medicines or psychotherapy. Medicines are widely prescribed but they no inquiry has showed that they help and they even harm the possibility of healing.

With family constellations we see that the issue in psychosis is a family secret, often several generations back. It may have been a child that has another father as the official husband. Or a murder in the family. Or a child who has been abandoned.

If the secret is kept hidden, it remains in the family and is transferred to the next generations in a twisted form. Eventually someone becomes psychotic. It is not easy to access the family secret, not even in a family constellation, because the secret is carefully covered, to prevent people to be thrown out of the family. Shame and guilt are around it.

I see family constellations as necessary for the psychotic person and his or her family, as something which can eventually give healing, by bringing out the secret into the open. As Franz Ruppert describes it in his book: (English translation of the Dutch title:) 'the truth heals the delusion'.

I myself have experienced during the family constellations I have facilitated, how large the relief is for the psychotic person when things become clear and the family secret is revealed.

***

Healing depression with family constellations

A full chapter from my book: 'Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss', available at Amazon.com
I have discovered something about true perfection. It starts with coming to terms with yourself. That is the first thing. Many people are inwardly torn apart, they are not satisfied with them¬selves. If you examine it, you can see that they have banned one of their parents or even both parents from their heart. Then they are cut off from the source of their lives. If someone is cut off from one of his parents, he has only half of his life force and if someone has only half of his life force, he becomes depressed. Depression is a feeling of emptiness, not of sadness. To have a feeling of emptiness means that one of the parents is missing. Then the heart is only half full. The depression disappears and someone comes to terms with himself, if he both honours and loves both parents. If this happens it is experienced as grace. I cannot just make up my mind to do this. If it succeeds, it is experienced as a gift. Then the basic feeling becomes lighter and more fulfilled and the depression is over. 1
- Bert Hellinger

In family constellations - a process developed by Bert Hellinger and which I will explain later in this chapter - we see that depression is often a part of something that is much larger than the person who has the depression. The depression can arise for example because we may carry - out of love - the fate of someone in our family who didn't want to live any more, perhaps because that person wanted in turn to follow another person into death, again out of love. This all happens unconsciously. Seeing such an entanglement within your family system makes it possible to get out of the identification you have with the other family member. When the family member with whom you were identified is recognized and honoured, you feel in harmony and often from that moment on this person gives you strength and support. Now you are free to lead your own life and are no longer determined by patterns that are not yours.

Identification is an unconscious phenomenon; when someone from the family system is not recognized or appreciated, someone from a later generation takes over his or her role, to still ensure that this person is included. There appears to be an invisible 'law' in life that everyone is of equal value and significance and that everyone has the right to belong . This is not a theory in itself. It's something that shows experientially in the family constellations.

When you are depressed you can ask the question in a family constellation what lies behind the depression. You then come together with a group of people from amongst whom you choose individuals (representatives) to represent some of your family members. You also choose a representative for yourself. You position the representatives in the room according to your feeling, without giving them instructions. What you can then see is a portrait of your family that expresses something about the level of feelings of intimacy, pain, love or abandonment that the family members have in relation to each other.

When they are positioned in place, the representatives of the family members start feeling things that in reality the original family member feels or has felt. This is possible because we are all part of a large energy field, that is also called 'the great soul'. The representatives follow the impulses to move which arise in their body. This is not something they think about, but something that just happens, driven by the energy of the field in which they find themselves. A facilitator leads the family constellation, tuning-in to the energy field in which all representatives are present. He looks at the points when as a child your love was interrupted, and what can be done now to complete the original movement of outreach (in particular to the parents). In the end, where possible, a solution is found that feels right for all family members.

Bert Hellinger has discovered experientially (through the many family constellations he has facilitated) 'that depressions usually develop when one of the parents is excluded; if that parent has no place. For example, if the mother is excluded because she is sick. The child then takes care of the mother, instead of taking the mother. In this way the mother has no active force in the heart of the child. 2 Bert Hellinger describes 'taking' as follows: "When I take, I take what is available exactly as it is. This kind of taking is humble, and acknowledges the parents as they are. In taking I also acknowledge myself exactly as I am. It has a deep conciliatory quality - a coming to rest. It's beyond judgement of good or bad. Boasting about one's parents is also a sign of not having taken them. Idealizing shuts out the essential as well." 3

Because when you don't take the parent you are not nourished, you cannot lead your own life; you keep looking back then to the parent, in an attempt to be able still to receive from him or her.

I recognize myself in the above. As a child, I wanted to carry the pain of my mother, who had had such traumatic experiences in the Japanese concentration camp. I therefore took the role of mother-of-my-mother which meant I didn't take her as mother and could not receive from her. In this way the void arose in me which was to become my depression.

In Meera Hashimoto’s Art Therapist Training this becomes very clear to me in an exercise. Meera asks us to form groups of three people. The first of the three represents the child that you used to be, the second your mother and the third the fate of your mother. When it is my turn I myself represent the fate of my mother. The two others represent me-as-a-child and my mother. Then we move without words, in whatever way our feeling guides us. Later we share with each other what each of us has felt. The representative for me-as-child wants to go to the mother but is afraid and tiptoes very carefully around her all the time. The mother does not look at her fate. I represent in this constellation the fate of my mother, and feel that I am a Japanese from the concentration camp, in which she had to stay as a child. As the fate-of-my-mother I feel the agitation of wanting to reach the mother, who doesn't look at me, and I feel irritated by the child. The child indicates later (when we share our experiences after the constellation), that she made an effort to get her mother to look at her fate. In the constellation the mother does all of a sudden look at her fate. As the representative of this fate, I feel an enormous anger towards the mother and grab her by the wrists, which I almost squeeze. The mother then feels that she cannot escape and she relaxes. I feel how the power of me-as-fate enters her. With this, I can let go of the mother and feel calm. The mother goes back to her child and takes her under her care. The child then rests with the mother.

Seeing and experiencing this is an important turnaround for me. Now I am grateful for the fate of my mother (that is, for the Japanese occupier) because I have seen and felt how much strength he has given her. It is courageous of me to dare to face this. Previously I have wanted to support my mother by rejecting the Japanese. In the place of blaming my mother as I did before in many therapies for what she had not given me, I now feel proud of her and of the fact that I am born to such a powerful woman. I am also proud of the child in me who made her look at her fate in this constellation. She didn't want this before because she wanted to focus totally on caring for me, but unless she looked at her fate she wasn’t able to take care of me. I now see that she needed her fate to become strong . For this she had to go into the concentration camp. It was completely wrong for me to try as a child to take her fate away from her. It feels very good that I have seen in this constellation that my mother has owned the power of her destiny, and has taken this power into her body. Now I can rest in being-my-mother's-child and I can own my own destiny.

When I walk out of the group room, I meet - in my imagination - my mother. She stands in front of me next to the garden path on the Amalurra site. Next to her I see my father standing in his full height and strength. Very relaxed I stand before them as their child and look up to them. I feel safe and secure, with deep respect and gratitude for them. In the past I have sensed that my father felt helpless because he could not do anything for my mother with her pain. Because of this, to me he seemed to lack a certain strength. Now that my mother has owned her own strength by accepting what has happened in the war, she has become available to my father and they are each present for me and together as powerful parents. Taking my parents gives me a feeling of self-worth; my parents are behind me now with their strength, and support me. That my parents have long since died is not important here; for me they are alive in the present. I can now turn around and focus on my own life path. For the first time in my life I experience a calm, content happiness and a deep relaxation.

Bert Hellinger names this happiness as one of the two ways we can experience happiness: "If someone delivers good work, if he succeeds well in something and if what he does works well, then he becomes happy. This happiness feels like fulfillment, it is independent of the so-called 'feeling of happiness'. It has something essential, something full. It makes happy, even if you are in an unpleasant situation in which you are not happy. Then there is also the feeling of lightness; also this is happiness. I can have it with others together but also independently of them. This light-hearted feeling occurs when I have taken my parents, and when they live in me. And just as a whole, exactly as they are. Who takes his parents in this way, experiences that all the good that they have flows from them to you and that everything you feared or rejected in them remains outside. Who succeeds in this, notices how his sense of happiness grows. 4 This last kind of happiness happens to me after this family constellation.

Svagito Liebermeister, husband of Meera Hashimoto, with whom I later train in family constellations, has written a book about family constellations called 'Roots of Love'. I now feel personally what this title means: taking my parents in love gives me roots in the earth. For the first time in my life I feel really connected to the earth and I am grateful that I live on earth. Svagito: "You can only flower in your life when you feel that you have the best parents you could have. You cannot force this; it can only happen to you."

From a systemic point of view, there is harmony when everyone in the family system takes their proper role. This is not a rule or a theory, but something that shows itself in the family constellations. It is not easy to adopt the position of being the child again in relation to your parents when you have invested so many years in wanting to look after them; it has become part of your identity. You have to let go of your ego then. You have to be able to bow your head. At this point it can look like everything you stood for is gone without knowing what will happen instead. Sometimes several constellations are needed to take this step. Meditation is essential here, because meditation allows you to be able to stand alone in yourself. A second thing that is difficult when letting go of the parental role you had adopted is that it is accompanied by guilt. The feeling of guilt arises from the fear of no longer belonging if you give up your caring role. Not to belong can be experienced as life-threatening. Here too meditation helps; it helps you to endure this guilt, which is inevitable.

When someone who is depressed feels he is entangled too much with his parents, he is often invited in a therapy situation to express his anger towards them . It is thought that this is a way to become free from one’s parents. In his book 'Acknowledging What Is' Bert Hellinger describes that in family constellations he sees that when someone does this, "he will punish himself for this. His self-punishment may be expressed in some kind of failure: in work, perhaps by losing a job or being unable to find work; or in relationships, by losing a partner; or by losing a lot of money. “As a rule, someone is only depressed when he has not fully taken one of his parents. If someone expresses his anger in the way described above, he pushes the parent even further away, which can only lead to increased depression. “Apart from taking care of one's parents, also demanding how they should be is a form of not taking and rejecting them. When a person makes demands about how his parents should be, or what his parents ought to do for him, it prevents him taking from them what is essential, by which he remains empty." 5

Psychiatrist Gradus van Florestein, who works a lot with family constellations, says: "When we respect those with more experience, with more strength and wisdom than us, and know them to be behind us with their knowledge, strength and wisdom, then we live more fully and we are capable of more." 6

Before asking for a family constellation, you don't have to know with which family member you are identified or where you have stepped into an inappropriate role. You can't know this, because it all happens unconsciously. It becomes visible by what you see happening before your eyes in the constellation. The seeing in itself is healing, because it helps you understand your own and your family members’ situation. One constellation is often sufficient. You take in the image you see before you of the 'solution' -the establishment in which all family members feel harmonious - and that image often goes on working inside you for years. Hellinger says: "the soul goes slowly"; it is a process that needs time. You don't think about it anymore. The newly acquired insight will lead its own life.

The link to the book ‘Depression, a Stepping-stone towards Bliss’ is: https://amzn.to/3mD8xJ1

And the link tot he podcast about this book is: https://bit.ly/3lTsYkP

Footnotes
Bert Hellinger - The wisdom is continuously on the way
Bert Hellinger - Acknowledging What Is
Bert Hellinger - Acknowledging What Is
Bert Hellinger - The wisdom is continuously on the way
Bert Hellinger - Acknowledging What Is
Gradus van Florestein - The Depression from Shifting Perspective

***

The right attitude of the child towards the parents

The solution of your problem is directly related with how much distance you can take from your mother; with how much distance you can take from your parents.
Not meant is physical distance. People who remain at a distance physically of their parents are often most entangled with them.
To be able to take distance from your parents in the sense of living your own life, it is first necessary to allow yourself to be embraced by them (this is also possible if they have died already).

When you started to take care of your parents as a child, it is not easy sometimes to get back the positition of the child again and to just receive from your parents. You have to let go of the wrong position as parent-of-your-parent and you have to let go of your ego; taking care of your parent had become part of your identity. If you let go of that, first there is a big hole. A hole, you have to hold out. From there a new identity arises; an identity from which your life really can start flowing... ruit je leven pas echt kan gaan stromen...

I am grateful for this insight that comes from the Family Constellations. I am also grateful toSvagito Liebermeister , from whom I have received my training and who has laid the foundations of my deepening in and facilitating of family constellations.
You are welcome to experience the healing effect of family constellations in an individual session, a group session or a family constellation weekend. More information you find on my website.

***

Talking about your eating problem is important

Most people with an eating problem (anorexia, bulimia or anything in between) keep their eating problem a secret. I did that myself. The taboo is so big and there is often so much misunderstanding from the environment.

Talking about the eating problem with family members, a therapist, and a close friend is very important. Why?

Because this brings the eating pattern to reality: it becomes visible. And with that becoming visible, you also have to take responsibility for it. That does not mean that you already have to know how to get out, because that takes a lot of time. But it means that it is faced, and that a start can be created to get started with it.

Of course it is good to see whom you do and do not tell. If you know in advance that someone will not understand at all, it is better not to discuss it with that person. But in many cases you don't know in advance how someone will react.

The advantage of sharing what you are dealing with is that you will notice that many people are struggling with an eating problem. These people often wait until there is someone who dares to show up first. And with that, the threshold has been lowered to start talking about it yourself.

I dare say that almost every woman (and many men too) have or have had a difficult relationship with food.

Keeping the problem a secret can also pretend it doesn't exist to yourself. But that is of course an illusion.

If you first want to discuss it with people who do not belong to your family, but who do have experience with eating problems, you can approach a self-help group, for example. 

If you have an eating problem, I wish you all the best with this important step.

***

Your pain is asking you to be held

Jeff Foster: “Stop trying to heal yourself, fix yourself.

Stop trying to fast-forward the movie of your life, chasing futures that never seem to arrive.
Instead, bow deeply to yourself as you actually are.

Your pain, your sorrow, your doubts, your deepest longings, your fearful thoughts, are not mistakes and they aren’t asking to be healed.
They are asking to be held.

Here, now, lightly, in the loving arms of present awareness.”

***

Remain with the moment

And because of this mind who is always on journey you can never be in touch with the real. You eat but you miss eating, the flavour, the taste, the smell, you miss it. You simply go on throwing things inside. It is ugly. But why you miss? Because the mind goes on thinking.You are thinking thousand and one things while you are eating.

Says Rinzai, that when I eat I only eat and when I sleep I only sleep. Somebody said nothing is special in it, everybody is doing it. Rinzai laughed and said:  is everybody is doing it everybody is a boeddha. Everybody is enlightened then. Eating simply eat, be with it. Walking simply walk. Be there. Don’t go ahead, don’t jump here and there. Mind always goes ahead or lags behind.

Remain with the moment. In the beginning it will be very difficult to remain with the moment. And sometimes the moment will not be very happy. You are angry. Then the mind start thinking of repentence. Or trying to do something so that the anger never happens again. Sometimes you are sad, you put on the radio or the tv, you start reading a book, because you would not like to be sad. You want to divert the mind. And because miserable moments are more than happy moments it becomes a constant habbit and when it is fixed, even when happiness comes you are not found at home, you are found somewhere else.

Make it a point: whatsoever, sadness, anger, whatsoever, depression, unhappiness, be with it. And you will suddenly become surprised, that when you remain with sadness sadness changes into a beautiful thing. Sadness becomes a depth. If you remain with anger, not thinking about, just being with, anger is transformed. It becomes forgivenness. If you remain with sex, sex takes a different quality, it becomes love.

If you start living with the moment you will see your ‘being with’ is a miracle, it has a magic to it. Happiness will become deeper. Ordinarily your happiness is just on the surface. Deep down you carry millions of things. Just on the surface it is. If you remain with it it will become deeper and deeper and deeper. If you start ‘living with’ everything is transformed because you bring a new quality of being, of awareness, of witnessing. Don’t fight against sadness and don’t hanker about happiness, because that is going away, astray.

Have you observed? If you go for a holliday to the Himalayas or to Switzerland, for months you plan. To arrive there. And the moment you arrive your mind has already started to plan when to depart. How to go back home. Look, for months you plan how to arrive, and when you arrive or not even arrive, just on the way, and your mind has started to go back. How to depart? Your every arrival is just the beginning of a departure. And you are never there, because you can not be there.

Again back home you will start thinking. Back home you will start thinking: what happened in the Himalayas. What beautiful experiences you went through. And you were never there. It is as if you have read about them, it is as if somebody else has told you. You look at the memory as if the memory functions on its own. It takes photographes and becomes an album. Back home you will open the album and see and you will say to friends: beautiful, and you will start planning again, next year, you are going to the Himalayas.

Mind is never where you are. Awareness is always there where you are. Drop more and more mind and minding and become more and more aware and alert. Bring yourself together in the moment.

Difficult in the beginning. Because of the old habbit it will go again and again, bring it back. No need to fight, simply call it back: come ! Again it will go within seconds. It will not be there. Call it back again. And by and by when you start enjoying this moment, the eternal now, the only time that there is, only existence that there is, the only life that there is, when you start enjoying it, more and more, the mind will be coming to it less and less; it will be going. Then a tuning happens, suddenly you are here, at home, and the reality is revealed. The reality was always there, you were not there. It is not the truth that has to be sought, it is you who has to be brought home.
